<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Guilty, or Not Guilty</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Unfortunately for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, the intruder was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival⁠—whether he pleased or whether he did not please. There she was in his law chamber, present in the flesh, a sight pleasing neither to her husband nor to her husband’s client. She had knocked at the outside door, which, in the absence of the fag, had been opened by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crabwitz, and had immediately walked across the passage towards her husband’s room, expressing her knowledge that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival was within. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crabwitz had all the will in the world to stop her progress, but he found that he lacked the power to stay it for a moment.</p>
			<p>The advantages of matrimony are many and great⁠—so many and so great, that all men, doubtless, ought to marry. But even matrimony may have its drawbacks; among which unconcealed and undeserved jealousy on the part of the wife is perhaps as disagreeable as any. What is a man to do when he is accused before the world⁠—before any small fraction of the world, of making love to some lady of his acquaintance? What is he to say? What way is he to look? “My love, I didn’t. I never did, and wouldn’t think of it for worlds. I say it with my hand on my heart. There is <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jones herself, and I appeal to her.” He is reduced to that! But should any innocent man be so reduced by the wife of his bosom?</p>
			<p>I am speaking of undeserved jealousy, and it may therefore be thought that my remarks do not apply to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival. They do apply to her as much as to any woman. That general idea as to the strange goddesses was on her part no more than a suspicion: and all women who so torment themselves and their husbands may plead as much as she could. And for this peculiar idea as to Lady Mason she had no ground whatever. Lady Mason may have had her faults, but a propensity to rob <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival of her husband’s affections had not hitherto been one of them. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival was a clever lawyer, and she had great need of his assistance; therefore she had come to his chambers, and therefore she had placed her hand in his. That <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival liked his client because she was good looking may be true. I like my horse, my picture, the view from my study window for the same reason. I am inclined to think that there was nothing more in it than that.</p>
			<p>“My dear!” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, stepping back a little, and letting his hands fall to his sides. Lady Mason also took a step backwards, and then with considerable presence of mind recovered herself and put out her hand to greet <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival.</p>
			<p>“How do you do, Lady Mason?” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival, without any presence of mind at all. “I hope I have the pleasure of seeing you very well. I did hear that you were to be in town⁠—shopping; but I did not for a moment expect the⁠—gratification of finding you here.” And every word that the dear, good, heart-sore woman spoke, told the tale of her jealousy as plainly as though she had flown at Lady Mason’s cap with all the bold demonstrative energy of Spitalfields or <abbr>St.</abbr> Giles.</p>
			<p>“I came up on purpose to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival about some unfortunate law business,” said Lady Mason.</p>
			<p>“Oh, indeed! Your son Lucius did say⁠—shopping.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; I told him so. When a lady is unfortunate enough to be driven to a lawyer for advice, she does not wish to make it known. I should be very sorry if my dear boy were to guess that I had this new trouble; or, indeed, if anyone were to know it. I am sure that I shall be as safe with you, dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival, as I am with your husband.” And she stepped up to the angry matron, looking earnestly into her face.</p>
			<p>To a true tale of woman’s sorrow <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival’s heart could be as snow under the noonday sun. Had Lady Mason gone to her and told her all her fears and all her troubles, sought counsel and aid from her, and appealed to her motherly feelings, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival would have been urgent night and day in persuading her husband to take up the widow’s case. She would have bade him work his very best without fee or reward, and would herself have shown Lady Mason the way to Old Square, Lincoln’s Inn. She would have been discreet too, speaking no word of idle gossip to anyone. When he, in their happy days, had told his legal secrets to her, she had never gossiped⁠—had never spoken an idle word concerning them. And she would have been constant to her friend, giving great consolation in the time of trouble, as one woman can console another. The thought that all this might be so did come across her for a moment, for there was innocence written in Lady Mason’s eyes. But then she looked at her husband’s face; and as she found no innocence there, her heart was again hardened. The woman’s face could lie;⁠—“the faces of such women are all lies,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival said to herself;⁠—but in her presence his face had been compelled to speak the truth.</p>
			<p>“Oh dear, no; I shall say nothing of course,” she said. “I am quite sorry that I intruded. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, as I happened to be in Holborn⁠—at Mudie’s for some books⁠—I thought I would come down and ask whether you intend to dine at home today. You said nothing about it either last night or this morning; and nowadays one really does not know how to manage in such matters.”</p>
			<p>“I told you that I should return to Birmingham this afternoon; I shall dine there,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, very sulkily.</p>
			<p>“Oh, very well. I certainly knew that you were going out of town. I did not at all expect that you would remain at home; but I thought that you might, perhaps, like to have your dinner before you went. Good morning, Lady Mason; I hope you may be successful in your⁠—lawsuit.” And then, curtsying to her husband’s client, she prepared to withdraw.</p>
			<p>“I believe that I have said all that I need say, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival,” said Lady Mason; “so that if <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival wishes⁠—,” and she also gathered herself up as though she were ready to leave the room.</p>
			<p>“I hardly know what <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival wishes,” said the husband.</p>
			<p>“My wishes are nothing,” said the wife, “and I really am quite sorry that I came in.” And then she did go, leaving her husband and the woman of whom she was jealous once more alone together. Upon the whole I think that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival was right in not going home that day to his dinner.</p>
			<p>As the door closed somewhat loudly behind the angry lady⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crabwitz having rushed out hardly in time to moderate the violence of the slam⁠—Lady Mason and her imputed lover were left looking at each other. It was certainly hard upon Lady Mason, and so she felt it. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival was fifty-five, and endowed with a bluish nose; and she was over forty, and had lived for twenty years as a widow without incurring a breath of scandal.</p>
			<p>“I hope I have not been to blame,” said Lady Mason in a soft, sad voice; “but perhaps <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival specially wished to find you alone.”</p>
			<p>“No, no; not at all.”</p>
			<p>“I shall be so unhappy if I think that I have been in the way. If <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival wished to speak to you on business I am not surprised that she should be angry, for I know that barristers do not usually allow themselves to be troubled by their clients in their own chambers.”</p>
			<p>“Nor by their wives,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival might have added, but he did not.</p>
			<p>“Do not mind it,” he said; “it is nothing. She is the best-tempered woman in the world; but at times it is impossible to answer even for the best-tempered.”</p>
			<p>“I will trust you to make my peace with her.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, of course; she will not think of it after today; nor must you, Lady Mason.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no; except that I would not for the world be the cause of annoyance to my friends. Sometimes I am almost inclined to think that I will never trouble anyone again with my sorrows, but let things come and go as they may. Were it not for poor Lucius I should do so.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, looking into her face, perceived that her eyes were full of tears. There could be no doubt as to their reality. Her eyes were full of genuine tears, brimming over and running down; and the lawyer’s heart was melted. “I do not know why you should say so,” he said. “I do not think your friends begrudge any little trouble they may take for you. I am sure at least that I may so say for myself.”</p>
			<p>“You are too kind to me; but I do not on that account the less know how much it is I ask of you.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘The labour we delight in physics pain,’ ” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival gallantly. “But, to tell the truth, Lady Mason, I cannot understand why you should be so much out of heart. I remember well how brave and constant you were twenty years ago, when there really was cause for trembling.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, I was younger then.”</p>
			<p>“So the almanac tells us; but if the almanac did not tell us I should never know. We are all older, of course. Twenty years does not go by without leaving its marks, as I can feel myself.”</p>
			<p>“Men do not grow old as women do, who live alone and gather rust as they feed on their own thoughts.”</p>
			<p>“I know no one whom time has touched so lightly as yourself, Lady Mason; but if I may speak to you as a friend⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If you may not, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, who may?”</p>
			<p>“I should tell you that you are weak to be so despondent, or rather so unhappy.”</p>
			<p>“Another lawsuit would kill me, I think. You say that I was brave and constant before, but you cannot understand what I suffered. I nerved myself to bear it, telling myself that it was the first duty that I owed to the babe that was lying on my bosom. And when standing there in the Court, with that terrible array around me, with the eyes of all men on me, the eyes of men who thought that I had been guilty of so terrible a crime, for the sake of that child who was so weak I could be brave. But it nearly killed me. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, I could not go through that again; no, not even for his sake. If you can save me from that, even though it be by the buying off of that ungrateful man⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You must not think of that.”</p>
			<p>“Must I not? ah me!”</p>
			<p>“Will you tell Lucius all this, and let him come to me?”</p>
			<p>“No; not for worlds. He would defy everyone, and glory in the fight; but after all it is I that must bear the brunt. No; he shall not know it;⁠—unless it becomes so public that he must know it.”</p>
			<p>And then, with some further pressing of the hand, and further words of encouragement which were partly tender as from the man, and partly forensic as from the lawyer, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival permitted her to go, and she found her son at the chemist’s shop in Holborn as she had appointed. There were no traces of tears or of sorrow in her face as she smiled on Lucius while giving him her hand, and then when they were in a cab together she asked him as to his success at Liverpool.</p>
			<p>“I am very glad that I went,” said he, “very glad indeed. I saw the merchants there who are the real importers of the article, and I have made arrangements with them.”</p>
			<p>“Will it be cheaper so, Lucius?”</p>
			<p>“Cheaper! not what women generally call cheaper. If there be anything on earth that I hate, it is a bargain. A man who looks for bargains must be a dupe or a cheat, and is probably both.”</p>
			<p>“Both, Lucius. Then he is doubly unfortunate.”</p>
			<p>“He is a cheat because he wants things for less than their value; and a dupe because, as a matter of course, he does not get what he wants. I made no bargain at Liverpool⁠—at least, no cheap bargain; but I have made arrangements for a sufficient supply of a first-rate unadulterated article at its proper market price, and I do not fear but the results will be remunerative.” And then, as they went home in the railway carriage the mother talked to her son about his farming as though she had forgotten her other trouble, and she explained to him how he was to dine with Sir Peregrine.</p>
			<p>“I shall be delighted to dine with Sir Peregrine,” said Lucius, “and very well pleased to have an opportunity of talking to him about his own way of managing his land; but, mother, I will not promise to be guided by so very old-fashioned a professor.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, when he was left alone, sat thinking over the interview that had passed. At first, as was most natural, he bethought himself of his wife; and I regret to say that the love which he bore to her, and the gratitude which he owed to her, and the memory of all that they had suffered and enjoyed together, did not fill his heart with thoughts towards her as tender as they should have done. A black frown came across his brow as he meditated on her late intrusion, and he made some sort of resolve that that kind of thing should be prevented for the future. He did not make up his mind how he would prevent it⁠—a point which husbands sometimes overlook in their marital resolutions. And then, instead of counting up her virtues, he counted up his own. Had he not given her everything; a house such as she had not dreamed of in her younger days? servants, carriages, money, comforts, and luxuries of all sorts? He had begrudged her nothing, had let her have her full share of all his hard-earned gains; and yet she could be ungrateful for all this, and allow her head to be filled with whims and fancies as though she were a young girl⁠—to his great annoyance and confusion. He would let her know that his chambers, his law chambers, should be private even from her. He would not allow himself to become a laughingstock to his own clerks and his own brethren through the impertinent folly of a woman who owed to him everything;⁠—and so on! I regret to say that he never once thought of those lonely evenings in Harley Street, of those long days which the poor woman was doomed to pass without the only companionship which was valuable to her. He never thought of that vow which they had both made at the altar, which she had kept so loyally, and which required of him a cherishing, comforting, enduring love. It never occurred to him that in denying her this he as much broke his promise to her as though he had taken to himself in very truth some strange goddess, leaving his wedded wife with a cold ceremony of alimony or suchlike. He had been openhanded to her as regards money, and therefore she ought not to be troublesome! He had done his duty by her, and therefore he would not permit her to be troublesome! Such, I regret to say, were his thoughts and resolutions as he sat thinking and resolving about <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival.</p>
			<p>And then, by degrees, his mind turned away to that other lady, and they became much more tender. Lady Mason was certainly both interesting and comely in her grief. Her colour could still come and go, her hand was still soft and small, her hair was still brown and smooth. There were no wrinkles in her brow though care had passed over it; her step could still fall lightly, though it had borne a heavy weight of sorrow. I fear that he made a wicked comparison⁠—a comparison that was wicked although it was made unconsciously.</p>
			<p>But by degrees he ceased to think of the woman and began to think of the client, as he was in duty bound to do. What was the real truth of all this? Was it possible that she should be alarmed in that way because a small country attorney had told his wife that he had found some old paper, and because the man had then gone off to Yorkshire? Nothing could be more natural than her anxiety, supposing her to be aware of some secret which would condemn her if discovered;⁠—but nothing more unnatural if there were no such secret. And she must know! In her bosom, if in no other, must exist the knowledge whether or no that will were just. If that will were just, was it possible that she should now tremble so violently, seeing that its justice had been substantially proved in various courts of law? But if it were not just⁠—if it were a forgery, a forgery made by her, or with her cognizance⁠—and that now this truth was to be made known! How terrible would that be! But terrible is not the word which best describes the idea as it entered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival’s mind. How wonderful would it be; how wonderful would it all have been! By whose hand in such case had those signatures been traced? Could it be possible that she, soft, beautiful, graceful as she was now, all but a girl as she had then been, could have done it, unaided⁠—by herself?⁠—that she could have sat down in the still hour of the night, with that old man on one side and her baby in his cradle on the other, and forged that will, signatures and all, in such a manner as to have carried her point for twenty years⁠—so skilfully as to have baffled lawyers and jurymen and resisted the eager greed of her cheated kinsman? If so, was it not all wonderful! Had not she been a woman worthy of wonder!</p>
			<p>And then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival’s mind, keen and almost unerring at seizing legal points, went eagerly to work, considering what new evidence might now be forthcoming. He remembered at once the circumstances of those two chief witnesses, the clerk who had been so muddleheaded, and the servant-girl who had been so clear. They had certainly witnessed some deed, and they had done so on that special day. If there had been a fraud, if there had been a forgery, it had been so clever as almost to merit protection! But if there had been such fraud, the nature of the means by which it might be detected became plain to the mind of the barrister⁠—plainer to him without knowledge of any circumstances than it had done to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason after many of such circumstances had been explained to him.</p>
			<p>But it was impossible. So said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival to himself, out loud;⁠—speaking out loud in order that he might convince himself. It was impossible, he said again; but he did not convince himself. Should he ask her? No; it was not on the cards that he should do that. And perhaps, if a further trial were forthcoming, it might be better for her sake that he should be ignorant. And then, having declared again that it was impossible, he rang his bell. “Crabwitz,” said he, without looking at the man, “just step over to Bedford Row, with my compliments, and learn what is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round’s present address;⁠—old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, you know.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crabwitz stood for a moment or two with the door in his hand, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, going back to his own thoughts, was expecting the man’s departure. “Well,” he said, looking up and seeing that his myrmidon still stood there.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crabwitz was not in a very good humour, and had almost made up his mind to let his master know that such was the case. Looking at his own general importance in the legal world, and the inestimable services which he had rendered to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, he did not think that that gentleman was treating him well. He had been summoned back to his dingy chamber almost without an excuse, and now that he was in London was not permitted to join even for a day the other wise men of the law who were assembled at the great congress. For the last four days his heart had been yearning to go to Birmingham, but had yearned in vain; and now his master was sending him about town as though he were an errand-lad.</p>
			<p>“Shall I step across to the lodge and send the porter’s boy to Round and Crook’s?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crabwitz.</p>
			<p>“The porter’s boy! no; go yourself; you are not busy. Why should I send the porter’s boy on my business?” The fact probably was, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival forgot his clerk’s age and standing. Crabwitz had been ready to run anywhere when his employer had first known him, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival did not perceive the change.</p>
			<p>“Very well, sir; certainly I will go if you wish it;⁠—on this occasion that is. But I hope, sir, you will excuse my saying⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Saying what?”</p>
			<p>“That I am not exactly a messenger, sir. Of course I’ll go now, as the other clerk is not in.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you’re too great a man to walk across to Bedford Row, are you? Give me my hat, and I’ll go.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, I did not mean that. I’ll step over to Bedford Row, of course;⁠—only I did think⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Think what?”</p>
			<p>“That perhaps I was entitled to a little more respect, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival. It’s for your sake as much as my own that I speak, sir; but if the gentlemen in the Lane see me sent about like a lad of twenty, sir, they’ll think⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What will they think?”</p>
			<p>“I hardly know what they’ll think, but I know it will be very disagreeable, sir;⁠—very disagreeable to my feelings. I did think, sir, that perhaps⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I’ll tell you what it is, Crabwitz, if your situation here does not suit you, you may leave it tomorrow. I shall have no difficulty in finding another man to take your place.”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry to hear you speak in that way, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, very sorry⁠—after fifteen years, sir⁠—.”</p>
			<p>“You find yourself too grand to walk to Bedford Row!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no. I’ll go now, of course, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival.” And then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crabwitz did go, meditating as he went many things to himself. He knew his own value, or thought that he knew it; and might it not be possible to find some patron who would appreciate his services more justly than did <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
