<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LVI: How Sir Peregrine Did Business with Mr. Round</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-56" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">How Sir Peregrine Did Business with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In the meantime Sir Peregrine was sitting at home trying to determine in what way he should act under the present emergency, actuated as he was on one side by friendship and on the other by duty. For the first day or two⁠—nay for the first week after the confession had been made to him⁠—he had been so astounded, had been so knocked to the earth, and had remained in such a state of bewilderment, that it had been impossible for him to form for himself any line of conduct. His only counsellor had been <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme; and, though he could not analyze the matter, he felt that her woman’s ideas of honour and honesty were in some way different from his ideas as a man. To her the sorrows and utter misery of Lady Mason seemed of greater weight than her guilt. At least such was the impression which her words left. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme’s chief anxiety in the matter still was that Lady Mason should be acquitted;⁠—as strongly so now as when they both believed her to be as guiltless as themselves. But Sir Peregrine could not look at it in this light. He did not say that he wished that she might be found guilty;⁠—nor did he wish it. But he did announce his opinion to his daughter-in-law that the ends of justice would so be best promoted, and that if the matter were driven to a trial it would not be for the honour of the court that a false verdict should be given. Nor would he believe that such a false verdict could be obtained. An English judge and an English jury were to him the Palladium of discerning truth. In an English court of law such a matter could not remain dark;⁠—nor ought it, let whatever misery betide. It was strange how that old man should have lived so near the world for seventy years, should have taken his place in Parliament and on the bench, should have rubbed his shoulders so constantly against those of his neighbours, and yet have retained so strong a reliance on the purity of the world in general. Here and there such a man may still be found, but the number is becoming very few.</p>
			<p>As for the property, that must of necessity be abandoned. Lady Mason had signified her agreement to this; and therefore he was so far willing that she should be saved from further outward punishment, if that were still possible. His plan was this; and to his thinking it was the only plan that was feasible. Let the estate be at once given up to the proper owner⁠—even now, before the day of trial should come; and then let them trust, not to Joseph Mason, but to Joseph Mason’s advisers to abstain from prosecuting the offender. Even this course he knew to be surrounded by a thousand difficulties; but it might be possible. Of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, he had heard a good report. He was a kind man, and even in this very matter had behaved in a way that had shamed his client. Might it not be possible that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round would engage to drop the prosecution if the immediate return of the property were secured? But to effect this must he not tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round of the woman’s guilt? And could he manage it himself? Must he not tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival? And by so doing, would he not rob Lady Mason of her sole remaining tower of strength?⁠—for if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival knew that she was guilty, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival must of course abandon her cause. And then Sir Peregrine did not know how to turn himself, as he thus argued the matter within his own bosom.</p>
			<p>And then too his own disgrace sat very heavy on him. Whether or no the law might pronounce Lady Mason to have been guilty, all the world would know her guilt. When that property should be abandoned, and her wretched son turned out to earn his bread, it would be well understood that she had been guilty. And this was the woman, this midnight forger, whom he had taken to his bosom, and asked to be his wife! He had asked her, and she had consented, and then he had proclaimed the triumph of his love to all the world. When he stood there holding her to his breast he had been proud of her affection. When Lord Alston had come to him with his caution he had scorned his old friend and almost driven him from his door. When his grandson had spoken a word, not to him but to another, he had been full of wrath. He had let it be known widely that he would feel no shame in showing her to the world as Lady Orme. And now she was a forger, and a perjurer, and a thief;⁠—a thief who for long years had lived on the proceeds of her dexterous theft. And yet was he not under a deep obligation to her⁠—under the very deepest? Had she not saved him from a worse disgrace;⁠—saved him at the cost of all that was left to herself? Was he not still bound to stand by her? And did he not still love her?</p>
			<p>Poor Sir Peregrine! May we not say that it would have been well for him if the world and all its trouble could have now been ended so that he might have done with it?</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme was his only counsellor, and though she could not be brought to agree with him in all his feelings, yet she was of infinite comfort to him. Had she not shared with him this terrible secret his mind would have given way beneath the burden. On the day after Lady Mason’s departure from The Cleeve, he sat for an hour in the library considering what he would do, and then he sent for his daughter-in-law. If it behoved him to take any step to stay the trial, he must take it at once. The matter had been pressed on by each side, and now the days might be counted up to that day on which the judges would arrive in Alston. That trial would be very terrible to him in every way. He had promised, during those pleasant hours of his love and sympathy in which he had felt no doubt as to his friend’s acquittal, that he would stand by her when she was arraigned. That was now impossible, and though he had not dared to mention it to Lady Mason, he knew that she would not expect that he should do so. But to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme he had spoken on the matter, and she had declared her purpose of taking the place which it would not now become him to fill! Sir Peregrine had started from his chair when she had so spoken. What! his daughter! She, the purest of the pure, to whom the very air of a court of law would be a contamination;⁠—she, whose whiteness had never been sullied by contact with the world’s dust; she set by the side of that terrible criminal, hand in hand with her, present to all the world as her bosom friend! There had been but few words between them on the matter; but Sir Peregrine had felt strongly that that might not be permitted. Far better than that it would be that he should humble his gray hairs and sit there to be gazed at by the crowd. But on all accounts how much was it to be desired that there should be no trial!</p>
			<p>“Sit down, Edith,” he said, as with her soft step she came up to him. “I find that the assizes will be here, in Alston, at the end of next month.”</p>
			<p>“So soon as that, father?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; look here: the judges will come in on the 25th of March.”</p>
			<p>“Ah me⁠—this is very sudden. But, father, will it not be best for her that it should be over?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme still thought, had always thought that the trial itself was unavoidable. Indeed she had thought and she did think that it afforded to Lady Mason the only possible means of escape. Her mind on the subject, if it could have been analyzed, would probably have been this. As to the property, that question must for the present stand in abeyance. It is quite right that it should go to its detestable owners⁠—that it should be made over to them at some day not very distant. But for the present, the trial for that old, long-distant crime was the subject for them to consider. Could it be wrong to wish for an acquittal for the sinner⁠—an acquittal before this world’s bar, seeing that a true verdict had undoubtedly been given before another bar? <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme trusted that no jury would convict her friend. Let Lady Mason go through that ordeal; and then, when the law had declared her innocent, let restitution be made.</p>
			<p>“It will be very terrible to all if she be condemned,” said Sir Peregrine.</p>
			<p>“Very terrible! But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Edith, if it comes to that, she will be condemned. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival is a lawyer and will not say so; but from his countenance, when he speaks of her, I know that he expects it!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, father, do not say so.”</p>
			<p>“But if it is so⁠—. My love, what is the purport of these courts of law if it be not to discover the truth, and make it plain to the light of day?” Poor Sir Peregrine! His innocence in this respect was perhaps beautiful, but it was very simple. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Aram, could he have been induced to speak out his mind plainly, would have expressed, probably, a different opinion.</p>
			<p>“But she escaped before,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme, who was clearly at present on the same side with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Aram.</p>
			<p>“Yes; she did;⁠—by perjury, Edith. And now the penalty of that further crime awaits her. There was an old poet who said that the wicked man rarely escapes at last. I believe in my heart that he spoke the truth.”</p>
			<p>“Father, that old poet knew nothing of our faith.”</p>
			<p>Sir Peregrine could not stop to explain, even if he knew how to do so, that the old poet spoke of punishment in this world, whereas the faith on which his daughter relied is efficacious for pardon beyond the grave. It would be much, ay, in one sense everything, if Lady Mason could be brought to repent of the sin she had committed; but no such repentance would stay the bitterness of Joseph Mason or of Samuel Dockwrath. If the property were at once restored, then repentance might commence. If the property were at once restored, then the trial might be stayed. It might be possible that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round might so act. He felt all this, but he could not argue on it. “I think, my dear,” he said, “that I had better see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round.”</p>
			<p>“But you will not tell him?” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme, sharply.</p>
			<p>“No; I am not authorised to do that.”</p>
			<p>“But he will entice it from you! He is a lawyer, and he will wind anything out from a plain, chivalrous man of truth and honour.”</p>
			<p>“My dear, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round I believe is a good man.”</p>
			<p>“But if he asks you the question, what will you say?”</p>
			<p>“I will tell him to ask me no such question.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, father, be careful. For her sake be careful. How is it that you know the truth;⁠—or that I know it? She told it here because in that way only could she save you from that marriage. Father, she has sacrificed herself for⁠—for us.”</p>
			<p>Sir Peregrine when this was said to him got up from his chair and walked away to the window. He was not angry with her that she so spoke to him. Nay; he acknowledged inwardly the truth of her words, and loved her for her constancy. But nevertheless they were very bitter. How had it come to pass that he was thus indebted to so deep a criminal? What had he done for her but good?</p>
			<p>“Do not go from me,” she said, following him. “Do not think me unkind.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, no,” he answered, striving almost ineffectually to repress a sob. “You are not unkind.”</p>
			<p>For two days after that not a word was spoken between them on the subject, and then he did go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round. Not a word on the subject was spoken between Sir Peregrine and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme; but she was twice at Orley Farm during the time, and told Lady Mason of the steps which her father-in-law was taking. “He won’t betray me!” Lady Mason had said. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme had answered this with what best assurance she should give; but in her heart of hearts she feared that Sir Peregrine would betray the secret.</p>
			<p>It was not a pleasant journey for Sir Peregrine. Indeed it may be said that no journeys could any longer be pleasant for him. He was old and worn and feeble; very much older and much more worn than he had been at the period spoken of in the commencement of this story, though but a few months had passed over his head since that time. For him now it would have been preferable to remain in the armchair by the fireside in his own library, receiving such comfort in his old age as might come to him from the affection of his daughter-in-law and grandson. But he thought that it behoved him to do this work; and therefore, old and feeble as he was, he set himself to his task. He reached the station in London, had himself driven to Bedford Row in a cab, and soon found himself in the presence of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round.</p>
			<p>There was much ceremonial talk between them before Sir Peregrine could bring himself to declare the purport which had brought him there. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round of course protested that he was very sorry for all this affair. The case was not in his hands personally. He had hoped many years since that the matter was closed. His client, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason of Groby Park, had insisted that it should be reopened; and now he, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, really hardly knew what to say about it.</p>
			<p>“But, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, do you think it is quite impossible that the trial should even now be abandoned?” asked Sir Peregrine very carefully.</p>
			<p>“Well, I fear it is. Mason thinks that the property is his, and is determined to make another struggle for it. I am imputing nothing wrong to the lady. I really am not in a position to have any opinion of my own⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, no, no; I understand. Of course your firm is bound to do the best it can for its client. But, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round;⁠—I know I am quite safe with you.”</p>
			<p>“Well; safe in one way I hope you are. But, Sir Peregrine, you must of course remember that I am the attorney for the other side⁠—for the side to which you are opposed.”</p>
			<p>“But still;⁠—all that you can want is your client’s interest.”</p>
			<p>“Of course we desire to serve his interest.”</p>
			<p>“And with that view, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, is it not possible that we might come to some compromise?”</p>
			<p>“What;⁠—by giving up part of the property?”</p>
			<p>“By giving up all the property,” said Sir Peregrine, with considerable emphasis.</p>
			<p>“Whew-w-w.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round at the moment made no other answer than this, which terminated in a low whistle.</p>
			<p>“Better that, at once, than that she should die brokenhearted,” said Sir Peregrine.</p>
			<p>There was then silence between them for a minute or two, after which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, turning himself round in his chair so as to face his visitor more fully, spoke as follows. “I told you just now, Sir Peregrine, that I was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason’s attorney, and I must now tell you, that as regards this interview between you and me, I will not hold myself as being in that position. What you have said shall be as though it had not been said; and as I am not, myself, taking any part in the proceedings, this may with absolute strictness be the case. But⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If I have said anything that I ought not to have said⁠—” began Sir Peregrine.</p>
			<p>“Allow me for one moment,” continued <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round. “The fault is mine, if there be a fault, as I should have explained to you that the matter could hardly be discussed with propriety between us.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round, I offer you my apology from the bottom of my heart.”</p>
			<p>“No, Sir Peregrine. You shall offer me no apology, nor will I accept any. I know no words strong enough to convey to you my esteem and respect for your character.”</p>
			<p>“Sir!”</p>
			<p>“But I will ask you to listen to me for a moment. If any compromise be contemplated, it should be arranged by the advice of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival and of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chaffanbrass, and the terms should be settled between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Aram and my son. But I cannot myself say that I see any possibility of such a result. It is not however for me to advise. If on that matter you wish for advice, I think that you had better see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Sir Peregrine, telling more and more of the story by every utterance he made.</p>
			<p>“And now it only remains for me to assure you once more that the words which have been spoken in this room shall be as though they had not been spoken.” And then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round made it very clear that there was nothing more to be said between them on the subject of Lady Mason. Sir Peregrine repeated his apology, collected his hat and gloves, and with slow step made his way down to his cab, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round absolutely waited upon him till he saw him seated within the vehicle.</p>
			<p>“So Mat is right after all,” said the old attorney to himself as he stood alone with his back to his own fire, thrusting his hands into his trousers-pockets. “So Mat is right after all!” The meaning of this exclamation will be plain to my readers. Mat had declared to his father his conviction that Lady Mason had forged the codicil in question, and the father was now also convinced that she had done so. “Unfortunate woman!” he said; “poor, wretched woman!” And then he began to calculate what might yet be her chances of escape. On the whole he thought that she would escape. “Twenty years of possession,” he said to himself “and so excellent a character!” But, nevertheless, he repeated to himself over and over again that she was a wretched, miserable woman.</p>
			<p>We may say that all the persons most concerned were convinced, or nearly convinced, of Lady Mason’s guilt. Among her own friends <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival had no doubt of it, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chaffanbrass and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Aram but very little; whereas Sir Peregrine and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme of course had none. On the other side <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath were both fully sure of the truth, and the two Rounds, father and son, were quite of the same mind. And yet, except with Dockwrath and Sir Peregrine, the most honest and the most dishonest of the lot, the opinion was that she would escape. These were five lawyers concerned, not one of whom gave to the course of justice credit that it would ascertain the truth, and not one of whom wished that the truth should be ascertained. Surely had they been honest-minded in their profession they would all have so wished;⁠—have so wished, or else have abstained from all professional intercourse in the matter. I cannot understand how any gentleman can be willing to use his intellect for the propagation of untruth, and to be paid for so using it. As to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chaffanbrass and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solomon Aram⁠—to them the escape of a criminal under their auspices would of course be a matter of triumph. To such work for many years had they applied their sharp intellects and legal knowledge. But of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival;⁠—what shall we say of him?</p>
			<p>Sir Peregrine went home very sad at heart, and crept silently back into his own library. In the evening, when he was alone with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme, he spoke one word to her. “Edith,” he said, “I have seen <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round. We can do nothing for her there.”</p>
			<p>“I feared not,” said she.</p>
			<p>“No; we can do nothing for her there.”</p>
			<p>After that Sir Peregrine took no step in the matter. What step could he take? But he sat over his fire in his library, day after day, thinking over it all, and waiting till those terrible assizes should have come.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
