<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>XXXIV</h2>
				<h3>Mr. Furnival Looks for Assistance</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“And you think that nothing can be done down there?” said Mr. Furnival to his clerk, immediately after the return of Mr. Crabwitz from Hamworth to London.</p>
			<p>“Nothing at all, sir,” said Mr. Crabwitz, with laconic significance.</p>
			<p>“Well; I dare say not. If the matter could have been arranged at a reasonable cost, without annoyance to my friend Lady Mason, I should have been glad; but, on the whole, it will perhaps be better that the law should take its course. She will suffer a good deal, but she will be the safer for it afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“Mr. Furnival, I went so far as to offer a thousand pounds!”</p>
			<p>“A thousand pounds! Then they’ll think we’re afraid of them.”</p>
			<p>“Not a bit more than they did before. Though I offered the money, he doesn’t know the least that the offer came from our side. But I’ll tell you what it is, Mr. <span class="nowrap">Furnival⁠—.</span> I suppose I may speak my mind.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes! But remember this, Crabwitz; Lady Mason is no more in danger of losing the property than you are. It is a most vexatious thing, but there can be no doubt as to what the result will be.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Mr. Furnival⁠—I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“In such matters, I am tolerably well able to form an opinion.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, certainly!”</p>
			<p>“And that’s my opinion. Now I shall be very glad to hear yours.”</p>
			<p>“My opinion is this, Mr. Furnival, that Sir Joseph never made that codicil.”</p>
			<p>“And what makes you think so?”</p>
			<p>“The whole course of the evidence. It’s quite clear there was another deed executed that day, and witnessed by Bolster and Kenneby. Had there been two documents for them to witness, they would have remembered it so soon after the occurrence.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Crabwitz, I differ from you⁠—differ from you in toto. But keep your opinion to yourself, that’s all. I’ve no doubt you did the best for us you could down at Hamworth, and I’m much obliged to you. You’ll find we’ve got our hands quite full again⁠—almost too full.” Then he turned round to his table, and to the papers upon it; whereupon, Crabwitz took the hint, and left the room.</p>
			<p>But when he had gone, Mr. Furnival again raised his eyes from the papers on the table, and leaning back in his chair, gave himself up to further consideration of the Orley Farm case. Crabwitz he knew was a sharp, clever man, and now the opinion formed by Crabwitz, after having seen this Hamworth attorney, tallied with his own opinion. Yes; it was his own opinion. He had never said as much, even to himself, with those inward words which a man uses when he assures himself of the result of his own thoughts; but he was aware that it was his own opinion. In his heart of hearts, he did believe that that codicil had been fraudulently manufactured by his friend and client, Lady Mason.</p>
			<p>Under these circumstances, what should he do? He had the handle of his pen between his teeth, as was his habit when he was thinking, and tried to bring himself to some permanent resolution.</p>
			<p>How beautiful had she looked while she stood in Sir Peregrine’s library, leaning on the old man’s arm⁠—how beautiful and how innocent! That was the form which his thoughts chiefly took. And then she had given him her hand, and he still felt the soft silken touch of her cool fingers. He would not be a man if he could desert a woman in such a strait. And such a woman! If even guilty, had she not expiated her guilt by deep sorrow? And then he thought of Mr. Mason of Groby Park; and he thought of Sir Peregrine’s strong conviction, and of Judge Staveley’s belief; and he thought also of the strong hold which public opinion and twenty years of possession would still give to the cause he favoured. He would still bring her through! Yes; in spite of her guilt, if she were guilty; on the strength of her innocency, if she were innocent; but on account of her beauty, and soft hand, and deep liquid eye. So at least he would have owned, could he have been honest enough to tell himself the whole truth.</p>
			<p>But he must prepare himself for the battle in earnest. It was not as though he had been briefed in this case, and had merely to perform the duty for which he had been hired. He was to undertake the whole legal management of the affair. He must settle what attorney should have the matter in hand, and instruct that attorney how to reinstruct him, and how to reinstruct those other barristers who must necessarily be employed on the defence, in a case of such magnitude. He did not yet know under what form the attack would be made; but he was nearly certain that it would be done in the shape of a criminal charge. He hoped that it might take the direct form of an accusation of forgery. The stronger and more venomous the charge made, the stronger also would be public opinion in favour of the accused, and the greater the chance of an acquittal. But if she were to be found guilty on any charge, it would matter little on what. Any such verdict of guilty would be utter ruin and obliteration of her existence.</p>
			<p>He must consult with some one, and at last he made up his mind to go to his very old friend, Mr. Chaffanbrass. Mr. Chaffanbrass was safe, and he might speak out his mind to him without fear of damaging the cause. Not that he could bring himself to speak out his real mind, even to Mr. Chaffanbrass. He would so speak that Mr. Chaffanbrass should clearly understand him; but still, not even to his ears, would he say that he really believed Lady Mason to have been guilty. How would it be possible that he should feign before a jury his assured, nay, his indignant conviction of his client’s innocence, if he had ever whispered to any one his conviction of her guilt?</p>
			<p>On that same afternoon he sent to make an appointment with Mr. Chaffanbrass, and immediately after breakfast, on the following morning, had himself taken to that gentleman’s chambers. The chambers of this great guardian of the innocence⁠—or rather not-guiltiness of the public⁠—were not in any so-named inn, but consisted of two gloomy, dark, panelled rooms in Ely Place. The course of our story, however, will not cause us to make many visits to Ely Place, and any closer description of them may be spared. I have said that Mr. Chaffanbrass and Mr. Furnival were very old friends. So they were. They had known each other for more than thirty years, and each knew the whole history of the other’s rise and progress in the profession; but any results of their friendship at present were but scanty. They might meet each other in the streets, perhaps, once in the year; and occasionally⁠—but very seldom⁠—might be brought together on subjects connected with their profession; as was the case when they travelled together down to Birmingham. As to meeting in each other’s houses, or coming together for the sake of the friendship which existed⁠—the idea of doing so never entered the head of either of them.</p>
			<p>All the world knows Mr. Chaffanbrass⁠—either by sight or by reputation. Those who have been happy enough to see the face and gait of the man as, in years now gone, he used to lord it at the Old Bailey, may not have thought much of the privilege which was theirs. But to those who have only read of him, and know of his deeds simply by their triumphs, he was a man very famous and worthy to be seen. “Look; that’s Chaffanbrass. It was he who cross-examined <span class="nowrap">⸺⁠</span> at the Old Bailey, and sent him howling out of London, banished for ever into the wilderness.” “Where, where? Is that Chaffanbrass? What a dirty little man!”</p>
			<p>To this dirty little man in Ely Place, Mr. Furnival now went in his difficulty. Mr. Furnival might feel himself sufficient to secure the acquittal of an innocent person, or even of a guilty person, under ordinary circumstances; but if any man in England could secure the acquittal of a guilty person under extraordinary circumstances, it would be Mr. Chaffanbrass. This had been his special line of work for the last thirty years.</p>
			<p>Mr. Chaffanbrass was a dirty little man; and when seen without his gown and wig, might at a first glance be thought insignificant. But he knew well how to hold his own in the world, and could maintain his opinion, unshaken, against all the judges in the land. “Well, Furnival, and what can I do for you?” he said, as soon as the member for the Essex Marshes was seated opposite to him. “It isn’t often that the light of your countenance shines so far east as this. Somebody must be in trouble, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“Somebody is in trouble,” said Mr. Furnival; and then he began to tell his story. Mr. Chaffanbrass listened almost in silence throughout. Now and then he asked a question by a word or two, expressing no opinion whatever as he did so; but he was satisfied to leave the talking altogether in the hands of his visitor till the whole tale was told. “Ah,” he said then, “a clever woman!”</p>
			<p>“An uncommonly sweet creature too,” said Mr. Furnival.</p>
			<p>“I dare say,” said Mr. Chaffanbrass; and then there was a pause.</p>
			<p>“And what can I do for you?” said Mr. Chaffanbrass.</p>
			<p>“In the first place I should be very glad to have your advice; and <span class="nowrap">then⁠—.</span> Of course I must lead in defending her⁠—unless it were well that I should put the case altogether in your hands.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no! don’t think of that. I couldn’t give the time to it. My heart is not in it, as yours is. Where will it be?”</p>
			<p>“At Alston, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>“At the Spring assizes. That will be⁠—. Let me see; about the 10th of March.”</p>
			<p>“I should think we might get it postponed till the summer. Round is not at all hot about it.”</p>
			<p>“Should we gain anything by that? If a prisoner be innocent why torment him by delay. He is tolerably sure of escape. If he be guilty, extension of time only brings out the facts the clearer. As far as my experience goes, the sooner a man is tried the better⁠—always.”</p>
			<p>“And you would consent to hold a brief?”</p>
			<p>“Under you? Well; yes. I don’t mind it at Alston. Anything to oblige an old friend. I never was proud, you know.”</p>
			<p>“And what do you think about it, Chaffanbrass?”</p>
			<p>“Ah! that’s the question.”</p>
			<p>“She must be pulled through. Twenty years of possession! Think of that.”</p>
			<p>“That’s what Mason, the man down in Yorkshire, is thinking of. There’s no doubt of course about that partnership deed?”</p>
			<p>“I fear not. Round would not go on with it if that were not all true.”</p>
			<p>“It depends on those two witnesses, Furnival. I remember the case of old, though it was twenty years ago, and I had nothing to do with it. I remember thinking that Lady Mason was a very clever woman, and that Round and Crook were rather slow.”</p>
			<p>“He’s a brute; is that fellow, Mason of Groby Park.”</p>
			<p>“A brute; is he? We’ll get him into the box and make him say as much for himself. She’s uncommonly pretty, isn’t she?”</p>
			<p>“She is a pretty woman.”</p>
			<p>“And interesting? It will all tell, you know. A widow with one son, isn’t she?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and she has done her duty admirably since her husband’s death. You will find too that she has the sympathies of all the best people in her neighbourhood. She is staying now at the house of Sir Peregrine Orme, who would do anything for her.”</p>
			<p>“Anything, would he?”</p>
			<p>“And the Staveleys know her. The judge is convinced of her innocence.”</p>
			<p>“Is he? He’ll probably have the Home Circuit in the summer. His conviction expressed from the bench would be more useful to her. You can make Staveley believe everything in a drawing-room or over a glass of wine; but I’ll be hanged if I can ever get him to believe anything when he’s on the bench.”</p>
			<p>“But, Chaffanbrass, the countenance of such people will be of great use to her down there. Everybody will know that she’s been staying with Sir Peregrine.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve no doubt she’s a clever woman.”</p>
			<p>“But this new trouble has half killed her.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t wonder at that either. These sort of troubles do vex people. A pretty woman like that should have everything smooth; shouldn’t she? Well, we’ll do the best we can. You’ll see that I’m properly instructed. By-the-by, who is her attorney? In such a case as that you couldn’t have a better man than old Solomon Aram. But Solomon Aram is too far east from you, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t he a Jew?”</p>
			<p>“Upon my word I don’t know. He’s an attorney, and that’s enough for me.”</p>
			<p>And then the matter was again discussed between them, and it was agreed that a third counsel would be wanting. “Felix Graham is very much interested in the case,” said Mr. Furnival, “and is as firmly convinced of her innocence as⁠—as I am.” And he managed to look his ally in the face and to keep his countenance firmly.</p>
			<p>“Ah,” said Mr. Chaffanbrass. “But what if he should happen to change his opinion about his own client?”</p>
			<p>“We could prevent that, I think.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not so sure. And then he’d throw her over as sure as your name’s Furnival.”</p>
			<p>“I hardly think he’d do that.”</p>
			<p>“I believe he’d do anything.” And Mr. Chaffanbrass was quite moved to enthusiasm. “I’ve heard that man talk more nonsense about the profession in one hour, than I ever heard before since I first put a cotton gown on my back. He does not understand the nature of the duty which a professional man owes to his client.”</p>
			<p>“But he’d work well if he had a case at heart himself. I don’t like him, but he is clever.”</p>
			<p>“You can do as you like, of course. I shall be out of my ground down at Alston, and of course I don’t care who takes the fag of the work. But I tell you this fairly;⁠—if he does go into the case and then turns against us or drops it⁠—I shall turn against him and drop into him.”</p>
			<p>“Heaven help him in such a case as that!” And then these two great luminaries of the law shook hands and parted.</p>
			<p>One thing was quite clear to Mr. Furnival as he had himself carried in a cab from Ely Place to his own chambers in Lincoln’s Inn. Mr. Chaffanbrass was fully convinced of Lady Mason’s guilt. He had not actually said so, but he had not even troubled himself to go through the little ceremony of expressing a belief in her innocence. Mr. Furnival was well aware that Mr. Chaffanbrass would not on this account be less likely to come out strongly with such assurances before a jury, or to be less severe in his cross-examination of a witness whose evidence went to prove that guilt; but nevertheless the conviction was disheartening. Mr. Chaffanbrass would know, almost by instinct, whether an accused person was or was not guilty; and he had already perceived, by instinct, that Lady Mason was guilty. Mr. Furnival sighed as he stepped out of his cab, and again wished that he could wash his hands of the whole affair. He wished it very much;⁠—but he knew that his wish could not be gratified.</p>
			<p>“Solomon Aram!” he said to himself, as he again sat down in his arm-chair. “It will sound badly to those people down at Alston. At the Old Bailey they don’t mind that kind of thing.” And then he made up his mind that Solomon Aram would not do. It would be a disgrace to him to take a case out of Solomon Aram’s hands. Mr. Chaffanbrass did not understand all this. Mr. Chaffanbrass had been dealing with Solomon Arams all his life. Mr. Chaffanbrass could not see the effect which such an alliance would have on the character of a barrister holding Mr. Furnival’s position. Solomon Aram was a good man in his way no doubt;⁠—perhaps the best man going. In taking every dodge to prevent a conviction no man could be better than Solomon Aram. All this Mr. Furnival felt;⁠—but he felt also that he could not afford it. “It would be tantamount to a confession of guilt to take such a man as that down into the country,” he said to himself, trying to excuse himself.</p>
			<p>And then he also made up his mind that he would sound Felix Graham. If Felix Graham could be induced to take up the case thoroughly believing in the innocence of his client, no man would be more useful as a junior. Felix Graham went the Home Circuit on which Alston was one of the assize towns.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
