<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival at Home</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Lucius Mason on his road to Liverpool had passed through London, and had found a moment to call in Harley Street. Since his return from Germany he had met Miss Furnival both at home at his mother’s house⁠—or rather his own⁠—and at The Cleeve. Miss Furnival had been in the neighbourhood, and had spent two days with the great people at The Cleeve, and one day with the little people at Orley Farm. Lucius Mason had found that she was a sensible girl, capable of discussing great subjects with him; and had possibly found some other charms in her. Therefore he had called in Harley Street.</p>
			<p>On that occasion he could only call as he passed through London without delay; but he received such encouragement as induced him to spend a night in town on his return, in order that he might accept an invitation to drink tea with the Furnivals. “We shall be very happy to see you,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival had said, backing the proposition which had come from her daughter without any very great fervour; “but I fear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival will not be at home. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival very seldom is at home now.” Young Mason did not much care for fervour on the part of Sophia’s mother, and therefore had accepted the invitation, though he was obliged by so doing to curtail by some hours his sojourn among the guano stores of Liverpool.</p>
			<p>It was the time of year at which few people are at home in London, being the middle of October; but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival was a lady of whom at such periods it was not very easy to dispose. She could have made herself as happy as a queen even at Margate, if it could have suited Furnival and Sophia to be happy at Margate with her. But this did not suit Furnival or Sophia. As regards money, any or almost all other autumnal resorts were open to her, but she could be contented at none of them because <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival always pleaded that business⁠—law business or political business⁠—took him elsewhere. Now <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival was a woman who did not like to be deserted, and who could not, in the absence of those social joys which Providence had vouchsafed to her as her own, make herself happy with the society of other women such as herself. Furnival was her husband, and she wanted him to carve for her, to sit opposite to her at the breakfast table, to tell her the news of the day, and to walk to church with her on Sundays. They had been made one flesh and one bone, for better and worse, thirty years since; and now in her latter days she could not put up with disseveration and dislocation.</p>
			<p>She had gone down to Brighton in August, soon after the House broke up, and there found that very handsome apartments had been taken for her⁠—rooms that would have made glad the heart of many a lawyer’s wife. She had, too, the command of a fly, done up to look like a private brougham, a servant in livery, the run of the public assembly-rooms, a sitting in the centre of the most fashionable church in Brighton⁠—all that the heart of woman could desire. All but the one thing was there; but, that one thing being absent, she came moodily back to town at the end of September. She would have exchanged them all with a happy heart for very moderate accommodation at Margate, could she have seen <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival’s blue nose on the other side of the table every morning and evening as she sat over her shrimps and tea.</p>
			<p>Men who had risen in the world as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival had done do find it sometimes difficult to dispose of their wives. It is not that the ladies are in themselves more unfit for rising than their lords, or that if occasion demanded they would not as readily adapt themselves to new spheres. But they do not rise, and occasion does not demand it. A man elevates his wife to his own rank, and when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown, on becoming solicitor-general, becomes Sir Jacob, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Brown also becomes my lady. But the whole set among whom Brown must be more or less thrown do not want her ladyship. On Brown’s promotion she did not become part of the bargain. Brown must henceforth have two existences⁠—a public and a private existence; and it will be well for Lady Brown, and well also for Sir Jacob, if the latter be not allowed to dwindle down to a minimum.</p>
			<p>If Lady <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">B.</abbr> can raise herself also, if she can make her own occasion⁠—if she be handsome and can flirt, if she be impudent and can force her way, if she have a daring mind and can commit great expenditure, if she be clever and can make poetry, if she can in any way create a separate glory for herself, then, indeed, Sir Jacob with his blue nose may follow his own path, and all will be well. Sir Jacob’s blue nose seated opposite to her will not be her summum bonum.</p>
			<p>But worthy <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival⁠—and she was worthy⁠—had created for herself no such separate glory, nor did she dream of creating it; and therefore she had, as it were, no footing left to her. On this occasion she had gone to Brighton, and had returned from it sulky and wretched, bringing her daughter back to London at the period of London’s greatest desolation. Sophia had returned uncomplaining, remembering that good things were in store for her. She had been asked to spend her Christmas with the Staveleys at Noningsby⁠—the family of Judge Staveley, who lives near Alston, at a very pretty country place so called. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival had been for many years acquainted with Judge Staveley⁠—had known the judge when he was a leading counsel; and now that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival was a rising man, and now that he had a pretty daughter, it was natural that the young Staveleys and Sophia Furnival should know each other. But poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival was too ponderous for this mounting late in life, and she had not been asked to Noningsby. She was much too good a mother to repine at her daughter’s promised gaiety. Sophia was welcome to go; but by all the laws of God and man it would behove her lord and husband to eat his mincepie at home.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival was to be back in town this evening,” the lady said, as though apologizing to young Mason for her husband’s absence, when he entered the drawing-room, “but he has not come, and I dare say will not come now.”</p>
			<p>Mason did not care a straw for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival. “Oh! won’t he?” said he. “I suppose business keeps him.”</p>
			<p>“Papa is very busy about politics just at present,” said Sophia, wishing to make matters smooth in her mother’s mind. “He was obliged to be at Romford in the beginning of the week, and then he went down to Birmingham. There is some congress going on there, is there not?”</p>
			<p>“All that must take a great deal of time,” said Lucius.</p>
			<p>“Yes; and it is a terrible bore,” said Sophia. “I know papa finds it so.”</p>
			<p>“Your papa likes it, I believe,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival, who would not hide even her grievances under a bushel.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think he likes being so much from home, mamma. Of course he likes excitement, and success. All men do. Do they not, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason?”</p>
			<p>“They all ought to do so, and women also.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! but women have no sphere, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason.”</p>
			<p>“They have minds equal to those of men,” said Lucius, gallantly, “and ought to be able to make for themselves careers as brilliant.”</p>
			<p>“Women ought not to have any spheres,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know that I quite agree with you there, mamma.”</p>
			<p>“The world is becoming a great deal too fond of what you call excitement and success. Of course it is a good thing for a man to make money by his profession, and a very hard thing when he can’t do it,” added <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival, thinking of the olden days. “But if success in life means rampaging about, and never knowing what it is to sit quiet over his own fireside, I for one would as soon manage to do without it.”</p>
			<p>“But, mamma, I don’t see why success should always be rampageous.”</p>
			<p>“Literary women who have achieved a name bear their honours quietly,” said Lucius.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival. “I am told that some of them are as fond of gadding as the men. As regards the old maids, I don’t care so much about it; people who are not married may do what they like with themselves, and nobody has anything to say to them. But it is very different for married people. They have no business to be enticed away from their homes by any success.”</p>
			<p>“Mamma is all for a Darby and Joan life,” said Sophia, laughing.</p>
			<p>“No I am not, my dear; and you should not say so. I don’t advocate anything that is absurd. But I do say that life should be lived at home. That is the best part of it. What is the meaning of home if it isn’t that?”</p>
			<p>Poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival! she had no idea that she was complaining to a stranger of her husband. Had anyone told her so she would have declared that she was discussing worldwide topics; but Lucius Mason, young as he was, knew that the marital shoe was pinching the lady’s domestic corn, and he made haste to change the subject.</p>
			<p>“You know my mother, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival said that she had the honour of acquaintance with Lady Mason; but on this occasion also she exhibited but little fervour.</p>
			<p>“I shall meet her up in town tomorrow,” said Lucius. “She is coming up for some shopping.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! indeed,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival.</p>
			<p>“And then we go down home together. I am to meet her at the chymist’s at the top of Chancery Lane.”</p>
			<p>Now this was a very unnecessary communication on the part of young Mason, and also an unfortunate one. “Oh! indeed,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival again, throwing her head a little back. Poor woman! she could not conceal what was in her mind, and her daughter knew all about it immediately. The truth was this. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival had been for some days on the move, at Birmingham and elsewhere, and had now sent up sudden notice that he should probably be at home that very night. He should probably be at home that night, but in such case would be compelled to return to his friends at Birmingham on the following afternoon. Now if it were an ascertained fact that he was coming to London merely with the view of meeting Lady Mason, the wife of his bosom would not think it necessary to provide for him the warmest welcome. This of course was not an ascertained fact; but were there not terrible grounds of suspicion? <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival’s law chambers were in Old Square, Lincoln’s Inn, close to Chancery Lane, and Lady Mason had made her appointment with her son within five minutes’ walk of that locality. And was it not in itself a strange coincidence that Lady Mason, who came to town so seldom, should now do so on the very day of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival’s sudden return? She felt sure that they were to meet on the morrow, but yet she could not declare even to herself that it was an ascertained fact.</p>
			<p>“Oh! indeed,” she said; and Sophia understood all about it, though Lucius did not.</p>
			<p>Then <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival sank into silence; and we need not follow, word for word, the conversation between the young lady and the young gentleman. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason thought that Miss Furnival was a very nice girl, and was not at all ill pleased to have an opportunity of passing an evening in her company; and Miss Furnival thought⁠—. What she thought, or what young ladies may think generally about young gentlemen, is not to be spoken openly; but it seemed as though she also were employed to her own satisfaction, while her mother sat moody in her own armchair. In the course of the evening the footman in livery brought in tea, handing it round on a big silver salver, which also added to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival’s unhappiness. She would have liked to sit behind her tea-tray as she used to do in the good old hardworking days, with a small pile of buttered toast on the slop-bowl, kept warm by hot water below. In those dear old hardworking days, buttered toast had been a much-loved delicacy with Furnival; and she, kind woman, had never begrudged her eyes, as she sat making it for him over the parlour fire. Nor would she have begrudged them now, neither her eyes nor the work of her hands, nor all the thoughts of her heart, if he would have consented to accept of her handiwork; but in these days <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival had learned a relish for other delicacies.</p>
			<p>She also had liked buttered toast, always, however, taking the pieces with the upper crust, in order that the more luscious morsels might be left for him; and she had liked to prepare her own tea leisurely, putting in slowly the sugar and cream⁠—skimmed milk it had used to be, dropped for herself with a sparing hand, in order that his large breakfast-cup might be whitened to his liking; but though the milk had been skimmed and scanty, and though the tea itself had been put in with a sparing hand, she had then been mistress of the occasion. She had had her own way, and in stinting herself had found her own reward. But now⁠—the tea had no flavour now that it was made in the kitchen and brought to her, cold and vapid, by a man in livery whom she half feared to keep waiting while she ministered to her own wants.</p>
			<p>And so she sat moody in her armchair, cross and sulky, as her daughter thought. But yet there was a vein of poetry in her heart, as she sat there, little like a sibyl as she looked. Dear old days, in which her cares and solicitude were valued; in which she could do something for the joint benefit of the firm into which she had been taken as a partner! How happy she had been in her struggles, how piteously had her heart yearned towards him when she thought that he was struggling too fiercely, how brave and constant he had been; and how she had loved him as he sat steady as a rock at his grinding work! Now had come the great success of which they had both dreamed together, of which they had talked as arm in arm they were taking the exercise that was so needful to him, walking quickly round Russell Square, quickly round Bloomsbury Square and Bedford Square, and so back to the grinding work in Keppel Street. It had come now⁠—all of which they had dreamed, and more than all they had dared to hope. But of what good was it? Was he happy? No; he was fretful, bilious, and worn with toil which was hard to him because he ate and drank too much; he was ill at ease in public, only half understanding the political life which he was obliged to assume in his new ambition; and he was sick in his conscience⁠—she was sure that must be so: he could not thus neglect her, his loving, constant wife, without some pangs of remorse. And was she happy? She might have revelled in silks and satins, if silks and satins would have done her old heart good. But they would do her no good. How she had joyed in a new dress when it had been so hard to come by, so slow in coming, and when he would go with her to the choosing of it! But her gowns now were hardly of more interest to her than the joints of meat which the butcher brought to the door with the utmost regularity. It behoved the butcher to send good beef and the milliner to send good silk, and there was an end of it.</p>
			<p>Not but what she could have been ecstatic about a full skirt on a smart body if he would have cared to look at it. In truth she was still soft and young enough within, though stout, and solid, and somewhat aged without. Though she looked cross and surly that night, there was soft poetry within her heart. If Providence, who had bountifully given, would now by chance mercifully take away those gifts, would she not then forgive everything and toil for him again with the same happiness as before? Ah! yes; she could forgive everything, anything, if he would only return and be contented to sit opposite to her once again. “O mortal Delius, dearest lord and husband!” she exclaimed within her own breast, in language somewhat differing from that of the Roman poet, “why hast thou not remembered to maintain a mind equal in prosperity as it was always equal and well poised in adversity? Oh my Delius, since prosperity has been too much for thee, may the Lord bless thee once more with the adversity which thou canst bear⁠—which thou canst bear, and I with thee!” Thus did she sing sadly within her own bosom⁠—sadly, but with true poetic cadence; while Sophia and Lucius Mason, sitting by, when for a moment they turned their eyes upon her, gave her credit only for the cross solemnity supposed to be incidental to obese and declining years.</p>
			<p>And then there came a ring at the bell and a knock at the door, and a rush along the nether passages, and the lady knew that he of whom she had been thinking had arrived. In olden days she had ever met him in the narrow passage, and, indifferent to the maid, she had hung about his neck and kissed him in the hall. But now she did not stir from the chair. She could forgive him all and run again at the sound of his footstep, but she must first know that such forgiveness and such running would be welcome.</p>
			<p>“That’s papa,” said Sophia.</p>
			<p>“Don’t forget that I have not met him since I have been home from Germany,” said Lucius. “You must introduce me.”</p>
			<p>In a minute or two <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival opened the door and walked into the room. Men when they arrive from their travels nowadays have no strippings of greatcoats, no deposits to make of thick shawls and double gloves, no absolutely necessary changes of raiment. Such had been the case when he had used to come back cold and weary from the circuits; but now he had left Birmingham since dinner by the late express, and enjoyed his nap in the train for two hours or so, and walked into his own drawing-room as he might have done had he dined in his own dining-room.</p>
			<p>“How are you, Kitty?” he said to his wife, handing to her the forefinger of his right hand by way of greeting. “Well, Sophy, my love;” and he kissed his daughter. “Oh! Lucius Mason. I am very glad to see you. I can’t say I should have remembered you unless I had been told. You are very welcome in Harley Street, and I hope you will often be here.”</p>
			<p>“It’s not very often he’d find you at home, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival,” said the aggrieved wife.</p>
			<p>“Not so often as I could wish just at present; but things will be more settled, I hope, before very long. How’s your mother, Lucius?”</p>
			<p>“She’s pretty well, thank you, sir. I’ve to meet her in town tomorrow, and go down home with her.”</p>
			<p>There was then silence in the room for a few seconds, during which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival looked very sharply at her husband. “Oh! she’s to be in town, is she?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, after a moment’s consideration. He was angry with Lady Mason at the moment for having put him into this position. Why had she told her son that she was to be up in London, thus producing conversation and tittle-tattle which made deceit on his part absolutely necessary? Lady Mason’s business in London was of a nature which would not bear much open talking. She herself, in her earnest letter summoning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival up from Birmingham, had besought him that her visit to his chambers might not be made matter of discussion. New troubles might be coming on her, but also they might not; and she was very anxious that no one should know that she was seeking a lawyer’s advice on the matter. To all this <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival had given in his adhesion; and yet she had put it into her son’s power to come to his drawing-room and chatter there of her whereabouts. For a moment or two he doubted; but at the expiration of those moments he saw that the deceit was necessary. “She’s to be in town, is she?” said he. The reader will of course observe that this deceit was practised, not as between husband and wife with reference to an assignation with a lady, but between the lawyer and the outer world with reference to a private meeting with a client. But then it is sometimes so difficult to make wives look at such matters in the right light.</p>
			<p>“She’s coming up for some shopping,” said Lucius.</p>
			<p>“Oh! indeed,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival. She would not have spoken if she could have helped it, but she could not help it; and then there was silence in the room for a minute or two, which Lucius vainly endeavoured to break by a few indifferent observations to Miss Furnival. The words, however, which he uttered would not take the guise of indifferent observations, but fell flatly on their ears, and at the same time solemnly, as though spoken with the sole purpose of creating sound.</p>
			<p>“I hope you have been enjoying yourself at Birmingham,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival.</p>
			<p>“Enjoyed myself! I did not exactly go there for enjoyment.”</p>
			<p>“Or at Romford, where you were before?”</p>
			<p>“Women seem to think that men have no purpose but amusement when they go about their daily work,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival; and then he threw himself back in his armchair, and took up the last Quarterly.</p>
			<p>Lucius Mason soon perceived that all the harmony of the evening had in some way been marred by the return of the master of the house, and that he might be in the way if he remained; he therefore took his leave.</p>
			<p>“I shall want breakfast punctually at half-past eight tomorrow morning,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, as soon as the stranger had withdrawn. “I must be in chambers before ten;” and then he took his candle and withdrew to his own room.</p>
			<p>Sophia rang the bell and gave the servant the order; but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival took no trouble in the matter whatever. In the olden days she would have bustled down before she went to bed, and have seen herself that everything was ready, so that the master of the house might not be kept waiting. But all this was nothing to her now.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
