<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-53" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>LIII</h2>
				<h3>LADY MASON RETURNS HOME</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Lady Mason remained at The Cleeve for something more than a week after that day on which she made her confession, during which time she was fully committed to take her trial at the next assizes at Alston on an indictment for perjury. This was done in a manner that astonished even herself by the absence of all publicity or outward scandal. The matter was arranged between Mr. Matthew Round and Mr. Solomon Aram, and was so arranged in accordance with Mr. Furnival’s wishes. Mr. Furnival wrote to say that at such a time he would call at The Cleeve with a post-chaise. This he did, and took Lady Mason with him before two magistrates for the county who were sitting at Doddinghurst, a village five miles distant from Sir Peregrine’s house. Here by agreement they were met by Lucius Mason who was to act as one of the bailsmen for his mother’s appearance at the trial. Sir Peregrine was the other, but it was brought about by amicable management between the lawyers that his appearance before the magistrates was not required. There were also there the two attorneys, Bridget Bolster the witness, one Torrington from London who brought with him the absolute deed executed on that 14th of July with reference to the then dissolved partnership of Mason and Martock; and there was Mr. Samuel Dockwrath. I must not forget to say that there was also a reporter for the press, provided by the special care of the latter-named gentleman.</p>
			<p>The arrival in the village of four different vehicles, and the sight of such gentlemen as Mr. Furnival, Mr. Round, and Mr. Aram, of course aroused some excitement there; but this feeling was kept down as much as possible, and Lady Mason was very quickly allowed to return to the carriage. Mr. Dockwrath made one or two attempts to get up a scene, and to rouse a feeling of public anger against the lady who was to be tried; but the magistrates put him down. They also seemed to be fully impressed with a sense of Lady Mason’s innocence in the teeth of the evidence which was given against her. This was the general feeling on the minds of all people⁠—except of those who knew most about her. There was an idea that affairs had so been managed by Mr. Joseph Mason and Mr. Dockwrath that another trial was necessary, but that the unfortunate victim of Mr. Mason’s cupidity and Mr. Dockwrath’s malice would be washed white as snow when the day of that trial came. The chief performers on the present occasion were Round and Aram, and a stranger to such proceedings would have said that they were acting in concert. Mr. Round pressed for the indictment, and brought forward in a very short way the evidence of Bolster and Torrington. Mr. Aram said that his client was advised to reserve her defence, and was prepared with bail to any amount. Mr. Round advised the magistrates that reasonable bail should be taken, and then the matter was settled. Mr. Furnival sat on a chair close to the elder of those two gentlemen, and whispered a word to him now and then. Lady Mason was provided with an arm-chair close to Mr. Furnival’s right hand, and close to her right hand stood her son. Her face was covered by a deep veil, and she was not called upon during the whole proceeding to utter one audible word. A single question was put to her by the presiding magistrate before the committal was signed, and it was understood that some answer was made to it; but this answer reached the ears of those in the room by means of Mr. Furnival’s voice.</p>
			<p>It was observed by most of those there that during the whole of the sitting Lady Mason held her son’s hand; but it was observed also that though Lucius permitted this he did not seem to return the pressure. He stood there during the entire proceedings without motion or speech, looking very stern. He signed the bail-bond, but even that he did without saying a word. Mr. Dockwrath demanded that Lady Mason should be kept in custody till the bond should also have been signed by Sir Peregrine; but upon this Mr. Round remarked that he believed Mr. Joseph Mason had intrusted to him the conduct of the case, and the elder magistrate desired Mr. Dockwrath to abstain from further interference. “All right,” said he to a person standing close to him. “But I’ll be too many for them yet, as you will see when she is brought before a judge and jury.” And then Lady Mason stood committed to take her trial at the next Alston assizes.</p>
			<p>When Lucius had come forward to hand her from the post-chaise in which she arrived Lady Mason had kissed him, but this was all the intercourse that then passed between the mother and son. Mr. Furnival, however, informed him that his mother would return to Orley Farm on the next day but one.</p>
			<p>“She thinks it better that she should be at home from this time to the day of the trial,” said Mr. Furnival; “and on the whole Sir Peregrine is inclined to agree with her.”</p>
			<p>“I have thought so all through,” said Lucius.</p>
			<p>“But you are to understand that there is no disagreement between your mother and the family at The Cleeve. The idea of the marriage has, as I think very properly, been laid aside.”</p>
			<p>“Of course it was proper that it should be laid aside.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; but I must beg you to understand that there has been no quarrel. Indeed you will, I have no doubt, perceive that, as Mrs. Orme has assured me that she will see your mother constantly till the time comes.”</p>
			<p>“She is very kind,” said Lucius. But it was evident from the tone of his voice that he would have preferred that all the Ormes should have remained away. In his mind this time of suffering to his mother and to him was a period of trial and probation⁠—a period, if not of actual disgrace, yet of disgrace before the world; and he thought that it would have best become his mother to have abstained from all friendship out of her own family, and even from all expressed sympathy, till she had vindicated her own purity and innocence. And as he thought of this he declared to himself that he would have sacrificed everything to her comfort and assistance if she would only have permitted it. He would have loved her, and been tender to her, receiving on his own shoulders all those blows which now fell so hardly upon hers. Every word should have been a word of kindness; every look should have been soft and full of affection. He would have treated her not only with all the love which a son could show to a mother, but with all the respect and sympathy which a gentleman could feel for a lady in distress. But then, in order that such a state of things as this should have existed, it would have been necessary that she should have trusted him. She should have leaned upon him, and⁠—though he did not exactly say so in talking over the matter with himself, still he thought it⁠—on him and on him only. But she had declined to lean upon him at all. She had gone away to strangers⁠—she, who should hardly have spoken to a stranger during these sad months! She would not have his care; and under those circumstances he could only stand aloof, hold up his head, and look sternly. As for her innocence, that was a matter of course. He knew that she was innocent. He wanted no one to tell him that his own mother was not a thief, a forger, a castaway among the world’s worst wretches. He thanked no one for such an assurance. Every honest man must sympathise with a woman so injured. It would be a necessity of his manhood and of his honesty! But he would have valued most a sympathy which would have abstained from all expression till after that trial should be over. It should have been for him to act and for him to speak during this terrible period. But his mother who was a free agent had willed it otherwise.</p>
			<p>And there had been one other scene. Mr. Furnival had introduced Lady Mason to Mr. Solomon Aram, having explained to her that it would be indispensable that Mr. Aram should see her, probably once or twice before the trial came on.</p>
			<p>“But cannot it be done through you?” said Lady Mason. “Though of course I should not expect that you can so sacrifice your valuable time.”</p>
			<p>“Pray believe me that that is not the consideration,” said Mr. Furnival. “We have engaged the services of Mr. Aram because he is supposed to understand difficulties of this sort better than any other man in the profession, and his chance of rescuing you from this trouble will be much better if you can bring yourself to have confidence in him⁠—full confidence.” And Mr. Furnival looked into her face as he spoke with an expression of countenance that was very eloquent. “You must not suppose that I shall not do all in my power. In my proper capacity I shall be acting for you with all the energy that I can use; but the case has now assumed an aspect which requires that it should be in an attorney’s hands.” And then Mr. Furnival introduced her to Mr. Solomon Aram.</p>
			<p>Mr. Solomon Aram was not, in outward appearance, such a man as Lady Mason, Sir Peregrine Orme, or others quite ignorant in such matters would have expected. He was not a dirty old Jew with a hooked nose and an imperfect pronunciation of English consonants. Mr. Chaffanbrass, the barrister, bore more resemblance to a Jew of that ancient type. Mr. Solomon Aram was a good-looking man about forty, perhaps rather over-dressed, but bearing about him no other sign of vulgarity. Nor at first sight would it probably have been discerned that he was of the Hebrew persuasion. He had black hair and a well-formed face; but his eyes were closer than is common with most of us, and his nose seemed to be somewhat swollen about the bridge. When one knew that he was a Jew one saw that he was a Jew; but in the absence of such previous knowledge he might have been taken for as good a Christian as any other attorney.</p>
			<p>Mr. Aram raised his hat and bowed as Mr. Furnival performed the ceremony of introduction. This was done while she was still seated in the carriage, and as Lucius was waiting at the door to hand her down into the house where the magistrates were sitting. “I am delighted to have the honour of making your acquaintance,” said Mr. Aram.</p>
			<p>Lady Mason essayed to mutter some word; but no word was audible, nor was any necessary. “I have no doubt,” continued the attorney, “that we shall pull through this little difficulty without any ultimate damage whatsoever. In the mean time it is of course disagreeable to a lady of your distinction.” And then he made another bow. “We are peculiarly happy in having such a tower of strength as Mr. Furnival,” and then he bowed to the barrister.</p>
			<p>“And my old friend Mr. Chaffanbrass is another tower of strength. Eh, Mr. Furnival?” And so the introduction was over.</p>
			<p>Lady Mason had quite understood Mr. Furnival;⁠—had understood both his words and his face, when he told her how indispensable it was that she should have full confidence in this attorney. He had meant that she should tell him all. She must bring herself to confess everything to this absolute stranger. And then⁠—for the first time⁠—she felt sure that Mr. Furnival had guessed her secret. He also knew it, but it would not suit him that any one should know that he knew it! Alas, alas! would it not be better that all the world should know it and that there might be an end? Had not her doom been told to her? Even if the paraphernalia of justice⁠—the judge, and the jury, and the lawyers, could be induced to declare her innocent before all men, must she not confess her guilt to him⁠—to that one⁠—for whose verdict alone she cared? If he knew her to be guilty what matter who might think her innocent? And she had been told that all must be declared to him. That property was his⁠—but his only through her guilt; and that property must be restored to its owner! So much Sir Peregrine Orme had declared to be indispensable⁠—Sir Peregrine Orme, who in other matters concerning this case was now dark enough in his judgment. On that point, however, there need be no darkness. Though the heaven should fall on her devoted head, that tardy justice must be done!</p>
			<p>When this piece of business had been completed at Doddinghurst, Lady Mason returned to The Cleeve, whither Mr. Furnival accompanied her. He had offered his seat in the post-chaise to Lucius, but the young man had declared that he was unwilling to go to The Cleeve, and consequently there was no opportunity for conversation between Lady Mason and her son. On her arrival she went at once to her room, and there she continued to live as she had done for the last few days till the morning of her departure came. To Mrs. Orme she told all that had occurred, as Mr. Furnival did also to Sir Peregrine. On that occasion Sir Peregrine said very little to the barrister, merely bowing his head courteously as each different point was explained, in intimation of his having heard and understood what was said to him. Mr. Furnival could not but see that his manner was entirely altered. There was no enthusiasm now, no violence of invective against that wretch at Groby Park, no positive assurance that his guest’s innocence must come out at the trial bright as the day! He showed no inclination to desert Lady Mason’s cause, and indeed insisted on hearing the particulars of all that had been done; but he said very little, and those few words adverted to the terrible sadness of the subject. He seemed too to be older than he had been, and less firm in his gait. That terrible sadness had already told greatly upon him. Those about him had observed that he had not once crossed the threshold of his hall door since the morning on which Lady Mason had taken to her own room.</p>
			<p>“He has altered his mind,” said the lawyer to himself as he was driven back to the Hamworth station. “He also now believes her to be guilty.” As to his own belief, Mr. Furnival held no argument within his own breast, but we may say that he was no longer perplexed by much doubt upon the matter.</p>
			<p>And then the morning came for Lady Mason’s departure. Sir Peregrine had not seen her since she had left him in the library after her confession, although, as may be remembered, he had undertaken to do so. But he had not then known how Mrs. Orme might act when she heard the story. As matters had turned out Mrs. Orme had taken upon herself the care of their guest, and all intercourse between Lady Mason and Sir Peregrine had passed through his daughter-in-law. But now, on this morning, he declared that he would go to her up stairs in Mrs. Orme’s room, and himself hand her down through the hall into the carriage. Against this Lady Mason had expostulated, but in vain.</p>
			<p>“It will be better so, dear,” Mrs. Orme had said. “It will teach the servants and people to think that he still respects and esteems you.”</p>
			<p>“But he does not!” said she, speaking almost sharply. “How would it be possible? Ah, me⁠—respect and esteem are gone from me for ever!”</p>
			<p>“No, not for ever,” replied Mrs. Orme. “You have much to bear, but no evil lasts for ever.”</p>
			<p>“Will not sin last for ever;⁠—sin such as mine?”</p>
			<p>“Not if you repent;⁠—repent and make such restitution as is possible. Lady Mason, say that you have repented. Tell me that you have asked Him to pardon you!” And then, as had been so often the case during these last days, Lady Mason sat silent, with hard, fixed eyes, with her hands clasped, and her lips compressed. Never as yet had Mrs. Orme induced her to say that she had asked for pardon at the cost of telling her son that the property which he called his own had been procured for him by his mother’s fraud. That punishment, and that only, was too heavy for her neck to bear. Her acquittal in the law court would be as nothing to her if it must be followed by an avowal of her guilt to her own son!</p>
			<p>Sir Peregrine did come up stairs and handed her down through the hall as he had proposed. When he came into the room she did not look at him, but stood leaning against the table, with her eyes fixed upon the ground.</p>
			<p>“I hope you find yourself better,” he said, as he put out his hand to her. She did not even attempt to make a reply, but allowed him just to touch her fingers.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps I had better not come down,” said Mrs. Orme. “It will be easier to say good-bye here.”</p>
			<p>“Good-bye,” said Lady Mason, and her voice sounded in Sir Peregrine’s ears like a voice from the dead.</p>
			<p>“God bless you and preserve you,” said Mrs. Orme, “and restore you to your son. God will bless you if you will ask Him. No; you shall not go without a kiss.” And she put out her arms that Lady Mason might come to her.</p>
			<p>The poor broken wretch stood for a moment as though trying to determine what she would do; and then, almost with a shriek, she threw herself on to the bosom of the other woman, and burst into a flood of tears. She had intended to abstain from that embrace; she had resolved that she would do so, declaring to herself that she was not fit to be held against that pure heart; but the tenderness of the offer had overcome her; and now she pressed her friend convulsively in her arms, as though there might yet be comfort for her as long as she could remain close to one who was so good to her.</p>
			<p>“I shall come and see you very often,” said Mrs. Orme⁠—“almost daily.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, no,” exclaimed the other, hardly knowing the meaning of her own words.</p>
			<p>“But I shall. My father is waiting now, dear, and you had better go.”</p>
			<p>Sir Peregrine had turned to the window, where he stood shading his eyes with his hand. When he heard his daughter-in-law’s last words he again came forward, and offered Lady Mason his arm. “Edith is right,” he said. “You had better go now. When you are at home you will be more composed.” And then he led her forth, and down the stairs, and across the hall, and with infinite courtesy put her into the carriage. It was a moment dreadful to Lady Mason; but to Sir Peregrine, also, it was not pleasant. The servants were standing round, officiously offering their aid⁠—those very servants who had been told about ten days since that this lady was to become their master’s wife and their mistress. They had been told so with no injunction as to secrecy, and the tidings had gone quickly through the whole country. Now it was known that the match was broken off, that the lady had been living up stairs secluded for the last week, and that she was to leave the house this morning, having been committed during the last day or two to stand her trial at the assizes for some terrible offence! He succeeded in his task. He handed her into the carriage, and then walked back through his own servants to the library without betraying to them the depth of his sorrow; but he knew that the last task had been too heavy for him. When it was done he shut himself up and sat there for hours without moving. He also declared to himself that the world was too hard for him, and that it would be well for him that he should die. Never till now had he come into close contact with crime, and now the criminal was one whom as a woman he had learned to love, and whom he had proposed to the world as his wife! The criminal was one who had declared her crime in order to protect him, and whom therefore he was still bound in honour to protect!</p>
			<p>When Lady Mason arrived at Orley Farm her son was waiting at the door to receive her. It should have been said that during the last two days⁠—that is ever since the committal⁠—Mrs. Orme had urged upon her very strongly that it would be well for her to tell everything to her son. “What! now, at once?” the poor woman had said. “Yes, dear, at once,” Mrs. Orme had answered. “He will forgive you, for I know he is good. He will forgive you, and then the worst of your sorrow will be over.” But towards doing this Lady Mason had made no progress even in her mind. In the violence of her own resolution she had brought herself to tell her guilt to Sir Peregrine. That effort had nearly destroyed her, and now she knew that she could not frame the words which should declare the truth to Lucius. What; tell him the tale; whereas her whole life had been spent in an effort to conceal it from him? No. She knew that she could not do it. But the idea of doing so made her tremble at the prospect of meeting him.</p>
			<p>“I am very glad you have come home, mother,” said Lucius, as he received her. “Believe me that for the present this will be the best place for both of us,” and then he led her into the house.</p>
			<p>“Dear Lucius, it would always be best for me to be with you, if it were possible.”</p>
			<p>He did not accuse her of hypocrisy in saying this; but he could not but think that had she really thought and felt as she now spoke nothing need have prevented her remaining with him. Had not his house ever been open to her? Had he not been willing to make her defence the first object of his life? Had he not longed to prove himself a good son? But she had gone from him directly that troubles came upon her, and now she said that she would fain be with him always⁠—if it were possible! Where had been the impediment? In what way had it been not possible? He thought of this with bitterness as he followed her into the house, but he said not a word of it. He had resolved that he would be a pattern son, and even now he would not rebuke her.</p>
			<p>She had lived in this house for some four-and-twenty years, but it seemed to her in no way like her home. Was it not the property of her enemy, Joseph Mason? and did she not know that it must go back into that enemy’s hands? How then could it be to her like a home? The room in which her bed was laid was that very room in which her sin had been committed. There in the silent hours of the night, while the old man lay near his death in the adjoining chamber, had she with infinite care and much slow preparation done that deed, to undo which, were it possible, she would now give away her existence⁠—ay, her very body and soul. And yet for years she had slept in that room, if not happily at least tranquilly. It was matter of wonder to her now, as she looked back at her past life, that her guilt had sat so lightly on her shoulders. The black unwelcome guest, the spectre of coming evil, had ever been present to her; but she had seen it indistinctly, and now and then the power had been hers to close her eyes. Never again could she close them. Nearer to her, and still nearer, the spectre came; and now it sat upon her pillow, and put its claw upon her plate; it pressed upon her bosom with its fiendish strength, telling her that all was over for her in this world:⁠—ay, and telling her worse even than that. Her return to her old home brought with it but little comfort.</p>
			<p>And yet she was forced to make an effort at seeming glad that she had come there⁠—a terrible effort! He, her son, was not gay or disposed to receive from her a show of happiness; but he did think that she should compose herself and be tranquil, and that she should resume the ordinary duties of her life in her ordinarily quiet way. In all this she was obliged to conform herself to his wishes⁠—or to attempt so to conform herself, though her heart should break in the struggle. If he did but know it all, then he would suffer her to be quiet⁠—suffer her to lie motionless in her misery! Once or twice she almost said to herself that she would make the effort; but when she thought of him and his suffering, of his pride, of the respect which he claimed from all the world as the honest son of an honest mother, of his stubborn will and stiff neck, which would not bend, but would break beneath the blow. She had done all for him⁠—to raise him in the world; and now she could not bring herself to undo the work that had cost her so dearly!</p>
			<p>That evening she went through the ceremony of dinner with him, and he was punctilious in waiting upon her as though bread and meat could comfort her or wine could warm her heart. There was no warmth for her in all the vintages of the south, no comfort though gods should bring to her their banquets. She was heavy laden⁠—laden to the breaking of her back, and did not know where to lay her burden down.</p>
			<p>“Mother,” he said to her that night, lifting his head from the books over which he had been poring, “There must be a few words between us about this affair. They might as well be spoken now.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Lucius; of course⁠—if you desire it.”</p>
			<p>“There can be no doubt now that this trial will take place.”</p>
			<p>“No doubt;” she said. “There can be no doubt.”</p>
			<p>“Is it your wish that I should take any part in it?”</p>
			<p>She remained silent, for some moments before she answered him, thinking⁠—striving to think, how best she might do him pleasure. “What part?” she said at last.</p>
			<p>“A man’s part, and a son’s part. Shall I see these lawyers and learn from them what they are at? Have I your leave to tell them that you want no subterfuge, no legal quibbles⁠—that you stand firmly on your own clear innocence, and that you defy your enemies to sully it? Mother, those who have sent you to such men as that cunning attorney have sent you wrong⁠—have counselled you wrong.”</p>
			<p>“It cannot be changed now, Lucius.”</p>
			<p>“It can be changed, if you will tell me to change it.”</p>
			<p>And then again she paused. Ah, think of her anguish as she sought for words to answer him! “No, Lucius,” she said, “it cannot be changed now.”</p>
			<p>“So be it, mother; I will not ask again,” and then he moodily returned to his books, while she returned to her thoughts. Ah, think of her misery!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
