<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Commerce</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Lucius Mason was still staying at Noningsby when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival made his visit to Sir Peregrine, and on that afternoon he received a note from his mother. Indeed, there were three notes passed between them on that afternoon, for he wrote an answer to his mother, and then received a reply to that answer. Lady Mason told him that she did not intend to return home to the Farm quite immediately, and explained that her reason for not doing so was the necessity that she should have assistance and advice at this period of her trouble. She did not say that she misdoubted the wisdom of her son’s counsels; but it appeared to him that she intended to signify to him that she did so, and he answered her in words that were sore and almost bitter. “I am sorry,” he said, “that you and I cannot agree about a matter that is of such vital concern to both of us; but as it is so, we can only act as each thinks best, you for yourself and I for myself. I am sure, however, that you will believe that my only object is your happiness and your fair name, which is dearer to me than anything else in the world.” In answer to this, she had written again immediately, filling her letter with sweet words of motherly love, telling him that she was sure, quite sure, of his affection and kind spirit, and excusing herself for not putting the matter altogether in his hands by saying that she was forced to lean on those who had supported her from the beginning⁠—through that former trial which had taken place when he, Lucius, was yet a baby. “And, dearest Lucius, you must not be angry with me,” she went on to say; “I am suffering much under this cruel persecution, but my sufferings would be more than doubled if my own boy quarrelled with me.” Lucius, when he received this, flung up his head. “Quarrel with her,” he said to himself; “nothing on earth would make me quarrel with her; but I cannot say that that is right which I think to be wrong.” His feelings were good and honest, and kindly too in their way; but tenderness of heart was not his weakness. I should wrong him if I were to say that he was hardhearted, but he flattered himself that he was just-hearted, which sometimes is nearly the same⁠—as had been the case with his father before him, and was now the case with his half-brother Joseph.</p>
			<p>The day after this was his last at Noningsby. He had told Lady Staveley that he intended to go, and though she had pressed his further stay, remarking that none of the young people intended to move till after twelfth-night, nevertheless he persisted. With the young people of the house themselves he had not much advanced himself; and altogether he did not find himself thoroughly happy in the judge’s house. They were more thoughtless than he⁠—as he thought; they did not understand him, and therefore he would leave them. Besides, there was a great day of hunting coming on, at which everybody was to take a part, and as he did not hunt that gave him another reason for going. “They have nothing to do but amuse themselves,” he said to himself; “but I have a man’s work before me, and a man’s misfortunes. I will go home and face both.”</p>
			<p>In all this there was much of conceit, much of pride, much of deficient education⁠—deficiency in that special branch of education which England has imparted to the best of her sons, but which is now becoming out of fashion. He had never learned to measure himself against others⁠—I do not mean his knowledge or his book-acquirements, but the everyday conduct of his life⁠—and to perceive that that which is insignificant in others must be insignificant in himself also. To those around him at Noningsby his extensive reading respecting the Iapetidae recommended him not at all, nor did his agricultural ambitions;⁠—not even to Felix Graham, as a companion, though Felix Graham could see further into his character than did the others. He was not such as they were. He had not the unpretentious, self-controlling humour, perfectly free from all conceit, which was common to them. Life did not come easy to him, and the effort which he was ever making was always visible. All men should ever be making efforts, no doubt; but those efforts should not be conspicuous. But yet Lucius Mason was not a bad fellow, and young Staveley showed much want of discernment when he called him empty-headed and selfish. Those epithets were by no means applicable to him. That he was not empty-headed is certain; and he was moreover capable of a great self-sacrifice.</p>
			<p>That his talents and good qualities were appreciated by one person in the house, seemed evident to Lady Staveley and the other married ladies of the party. Miss Furnival, as they all thought, had not found him empty-headed. And, indeed, it may be doubted whether Lady Staveley would have pressed his stay at Noningsby, had Miss Furnival been less gracious. Dear Lady Staveley was always living in a fever lest her only son, the light of her eyes, should fall irrevocably in love with some lady that was by no means good enough for him. Revocably in love he was daily falling; but some day he would go too deep, and the waters would close over his well-loved head. Now in her dear old favouring eyes Sophia Furnival was by no means good enough, and it had been quite clear that Augustus had become thoroughly lost in his attempts to bring about a match between Felix Graham and the barrister’s daughter. In preparing the bath for his friend he had himself fallen bodily into the water. He was always at Miss Furnival’s side as long as Miss Furnival would permit it. But it seemed to Lady Staveley that Miss Furnival, luckily, was quite as fond of having Lucius Mason at her side;⁠—that of the two she perhaps preferred Lucius Mason. That her taste and judgment should be so bad was wonderful to Lady Staveley; but this depravity though wonderful was useful; and therefore Lucius Mason might have been welcome to remain at Noningsby.</p>
			<p>It may, however, be possible that Miss Furnival knew what she was doing quite as well as Lady Staveley could know for her. In the first place she may possibly have thought it indiscreet to admit <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley’s attentions with too much freedom. She may have doubted their sincerity; or feared to give offence to the family, or <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason may in her sight have been the preferable suitor. That his gifts of intellect were at any rate equal to those of the other there can be no doubt. Then, his gifts of fortune were already his own, and for ought that Miss Furnival knew, might be equal to any that would ever appertain to the other gentleman. That Lady Staveley should think her swan better looking than Lady Mason’s goose was very natural; but then Lady Mason would no doubt have regarded the two birds in an exactly opposite light. It is only fair to conceive that Miss Furnival was a better judge than either of them.</p>
			<p>On the evening before his departure the whole party had been playing commerce; for the rule of the house during these holidays was this, that all the amusements brought into vogue were to be adapted to the children. If the grown-up people could adapt themselves to them, so much the better for them; if not, so much the worse; they must in such case provide for themselves. On the whole, the grown-up people seemed to live nearly as jovial a life as did the children. Whether the judge himself was specially fond of commerce I cannot say; but he persisted in putting in the whole pool, and played through the entire game, rigidly fighting for the same pool on behalf of a very small grandchild, who sat during the whole time on his knee. There are those who call cards the devil’s books, but we will presume that the judge was of a different way of thinking.</p>
			<p>On this special evening Sophia had been sitting next to Augustus⁠—a young man can always arrange these matters in his own house⁠—but had nevertheless lost all her lives early in the game. “I will not have any cheating tonight,” she had said to her neighbour; “I will take my chance, and if I die, I die. One can die but once.” And so she had died, three times indeed instead of once only, and had left the table. Lucius Mason also had died. He generally did die the first, having no aptitude for a collection of kings or aces, and so they two came together over the fire in the second drawing-room, far away from the card-players. There was nothing at all remarkable in this, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival and one or two others who did not play commerce were also there; but nevertheless they were separated from those of the party who were most inclined to criticise their conduct.</p>
			<p>“So you are leaving tomorrow, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason,” said Sophia.</p>
			<p>“Yes. I go home tomorrow after breakfast; to my own house, where for some weeks to come I shall be absolutely alone.”</p>
			<p>“Your mother is staying at The Cleeve, I think.”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—and intends remaining there as she tells me. I wish with all my heart she were at Orley Farm.”</p>
			<p>“Papa saw her yesterday. He went over to The Cleeve on purpose to see her; and this morning he has been talking to me about her. I cannot tell you how I grieve for her.”</p>
			<p>“It is very sad; very sad. But I wish she were in her own house. Under the circumstances as they now are, I think it would be better for her to be there than elsewhere. Her name has been disgraced⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason; not disgraced.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; disgraced. Mark you; I do not say that she has been disgraced; and pray do not suppose it possible that I should think so. But a great opprobrium has been thrown on her name, and it would be better, I think, that she should remain at home till she has cast it off from her. Even for myself, I feel it almost wrong to be here; nor would I have come had I known when I did come as much as I do know now.”</p>
			<p>“But no one can for a moment think that your mother has done anything that she should not have done.”</p>
			<p>“Then why do so many people talk of her as though she had committed a great crime? Miss Furnival, I know that she is innocent. I know it as surely as I know the fact of my own existence⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And we all feel the same thing.”</p>
			<p>“But if you were in my place⁠—if it were your father whose name was so bandied about in people’s mouths, you would think that it behoved him to do nothing, to go nowhere, till he had forced the world to confess his innocence. And this is ten times stronger with regard to a woman. I have given my mother my counsel, and I regret to say that she differs from me.”</p>
			<p>“Why do you not speak to papa?”</p>
			<p>“I did once. I went to him at his chambers, and he rebuked me.”</p>
			<p>“Rebuked you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason! He did not do that intentionally I am sure. I have heard him say that you are an excellent son.”</p>
			<p>“But nevertheless he did rebuke me. He considered that I was travelling beyond my own concerns, in wishing to interfere for the protection of my mother’s name. He said that I should leave it to such people as the Staveleys and the Ormes to guard her from ignominy and disgrace.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, he did not mean that!”</p>
			<p>“But to me it seems that it should be a son’s first duty. They are talking of trouble and of cost. I would give every hour I have in the day, and every shilling I own in the world to save her from one week of such suffering as she now endures; but it cuts me to the heart when she tells me that because she is suffering, therefore she must separate herself from me. I think it would be better for her, Miss Furnival, to be staying at home with me, than to be at The Cleeve.”</p>
			<p>“The kindness of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme must be a great support to her.”</p>
			<p>“And why should not my kindness be a support to her⁠—or rather my affection? We know from whom all these scandals come. My desire is to meet that man in a court of law and thrust these falsehoods down his throat.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! but you are a man.”</p>
			<p>“And therefore I would take the burden from her shoulders. But no; she will not trust to me. The truth, Miss Furnival, is this, that she has not yet learned to think of me as a man. To her I am still the boy for whom she is bound to provide, not the son who should bear for her all her cares. As it is I feel that I do not dare again to trouble her with my advice.”</p>
			<p>“Grandmamma is dead,” shouted out a shrill small voice from the card-table. “Oh, grandmamma, do have one of my lives. Look! I’ve got three,” said another.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, my dears; but the natural term of my existence has come, and I will not rebel against fate.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, grandmamma⁠—we’ll let you have another grace.”</p>
			<p>“By no means, Charley. Indeed I am not clear that I am entitled to Christian burial, as it is.”</p>
			<p>“A case of felo de se, I rather think,” said her son. “About this time of the night suicide does become common among the elders. Unfortunately for me, the pistol that I have been snapping at my own head for the last half-hour always hangs fire.”</p>
			<p>There was not much of lovemaking in the conversation which had taken place between young Mason and Sophia; not much at least up to this point; but a confidence had been established, and before he left her he did say a word or two that was more tender in its nature. “You must not be in dudgeon with me,” he said, “for speaking to you of all this. Hitherto I have kept it all to myself, and perhaps I should still have done so.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no; do not say that.”</p>
			<p>“I am in great grief. It is dreadful to me to hear these things said, and as yet I have found no sympathy.”</p>
			<p>“I can assure you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason, that I do sympathise with you most sincerely. I only wish my sympathy could be of more value.”</p>
			<p>“It will be invaluable,” he said, not looking at her, but fixing his eyes upon the fire, “if it be given with constancy from the first to the last of this sad affair.”</p>
			<p>“It shall be so given,” said Miss Furnival, also looking at the fire.</p>
			<p>“It will be tolerably long, and men will say cruel things of us. I can foresee this, that it will be very hard to prove to the world with certainty that there is no foundation whatever for these charges. If those who are now most friendly to us turn away from us⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I will never turn away from you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason.”</p>
			<p>“Then give me your hand on that, and remember that such a promise in my ears means much.” He in his excitement had forgotten that there were others in the room who might be looking at them, and that there was a vista open upon them direct from all the eyes at the card-table; but she did not forget it. Miss Furnival could be very enthusiastic, but she was one of those who in her enthusiasm rarely forgot anything. Nevertheless, after a moment’s pause, she gave him her hand. “There it is,” she said; “and you may be sure of this, that with me also such a promise does mean something. And now I will say good night.” And so, having received the pressure of her hand, she left him.</p>
			<p>“I will get you your candle,” he said, and so he did.</p>
			<p>“Good night, papa,” she said, kissing her father. And then, with a slight muttered word to Lady Staveley, she withdrew, having sacrificed the remainder of that evening for the sake of acceding to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason’s request respecting her pledge. It could not be accounted strange that she should give her hand to the gentleman with whom she was immediately talking as she bade him good night.</p>
			<p>“And now grandpapa is dead too,” said Marian, “and there’s nobody left but us three.”</p>
			<p>“And we’ll divide,” said Fanny Sebright; and so the game of commerce was brought to an end.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
