<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Mr. Furnival Again at His Chambers</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The Christmas doings at The Cleeve were not very gay. There was no visitor there, except Lady Mason, and it was known that she was in trouble. It must not, however, be supposed that she constantly bewailed herself while there, or made her friends miserable by a succession of hysterical tears. By no means. She made an effort to be serene, and the effort was successful⁠—as such efforts usually are. On the morning of Christmas-day they duly attended church, and Lady Mason was seen by all Hamworth sitting in The Cleeve pew. In no way could the baronet’s friendship have been shown more plainly than in this, nor could a more significant mark of intimacy have been given;⁠—all which Sir Peregrine well understood. The people of Hamworth had chosen to talk scandal about Lady Mason, but he at any rate would show how little attention he paid to the falsehoods that there were circulated. So he stood by her at the pew door as she entered, with as much deference as though she had been a duchess; and the people of Hamworth, looking on, wondered which would be right, Mr. Dockwrath or Sir Peregrine.</p>
			<p>After dinner Sir Peregrine gave a toast. “Lady Mason, we will drink the health of the absent boys. God bless them! I hope they are enjoying themselves.”</p>
			<p>“God bless them!” said Mrs. Orme, putting her handkerchief to her eyes.</p>
			<p>“God bless them both!” said Lady Mason, also putting her handkerchief to her eyes. Then the ladies left the room, and that was the extent of their special festivity. “Robert,” said Sir Peregrine immediately afterwards to his butler, “let them have what port wine they want in the servants’ hall⁠—within measure.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Sir Peregrine.”</p>
			<p>“And Robert, I shall not want you again.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Sir Peregrine.”</p>
			<p>From all which it may be imagined that the Christmas doings at The Cleeve were chiefly maintained below stairs.</p>
			<p>“I do hope they are happy,” said Mrs. Orme, when the two ladies were together in the drawing-room. “They have a very nice party at Noningsby.”</p>
			<p>“Your boy will be happy, I’m sure,” said Lady Mason.</p>
			<p>“And why not Lucius also?”</p>
			<p>It was sweet in Lady Mason’s ear to hear her son called by his Christian name. All these increasing signs of interest and intimacy were sweet, but especially any which signified some favour shown to her son. “This trouble weighs heavy on him,” she replied. “It is only natural that he should feel it.”</p>
			<p>“Papa does not seem to think much of it,” said Mrs. Orme. “If I were you, I would strive to forget it.”</p>
			<p>“I do strive,” said the other; and then she took the hand which Mrs. Orme had stretched out to her, and that lady got up and kissed her.</p>
			<p>“Dearest friend,” said Mrs. Orme, “if we can comfort you we will.” And then they sobbed in each other’s arms.</p>
			<p>In the mean time Sir Peregrine was sitting alone, thinking. He sat thinking, with his glass of claret untouched by his side, and with the biscuit which he had taken lying untouched upon the table. As he sat he had raised one leg upon the other, placing his foot on his knee, and he held it there with his hand upon his instep. And so he sat without moving for some quarter of an hour, trying to use all his mind on the subject which occupied it. At last he roused himself, almost with a start, and leaving his chair, walked three or four times the length of the room. “Why should I not?” at last he said to himself, stopping suddenly and placing his hand upon the table. “Why should I not, if it pleases me? It shall not injure him⁠—nor her.” And then he walked again. “But I will ask Edith,” he said, still speaking to himself. “If she says that she disapproves of it, I will not do it.” And then he left the room, while the wine still remained untasted on the table.</p>
			<p>On the day following Christmas Mr. Furnival went up to town, and Mr. Round junior⁠—Mat Round, as he was called in the profession⁠—came to him at his chambers. A promise had been made to the barrister by Round and Crook that no active steps should be taken against Lady Mason on the part of Joseph Mason of Groby, without notice being given to Mr. Furnival. And this visit by appointment was made in consequence of that promise.</p>
			<p>“You see,” said Matthew Round, when that visit was nearly brought to a close, “that we are pressed very hard to go on with this, and if we do not, somebody else will.”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless, if I were you, I should decline,” said Mr. Furnival.</p>
			<p>“You’re looking to your client, not to ours, sir,” said the attorney. “The fact is that the whole case is very queer. It was proved on the last trial that Bolster and Kenneby were witnesses to a deed on the 14th of July, and that was all that was proved. Now we can prove that they were on that day witnesses to another deed. Were they witnesses to two?”</p>
			<p>“Why should they not be?”</p>
			<p>“That is for us to see. We have written to them both to come up to us, and in order that we might be quite on the square I thought it right to tell you.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you; yes; I cannot complain of you. And what form do you think that your proceedings will take?”</p>
			<p>“Joseph Mason talks of indicting her for⁠—forgery,” said the attorney, pausing a moment before he dared to pronounce the dread word.</p>
			<p>“Indict her for forgery!” said Furnival, with a start. And yet the idea was one which had been for some days present to his mind’s eye.</p>
			<p>“I do not say so,” said Round. “I have as yet seen none of the witnesses myself. If they are prepared to prove that they did sign two separate documents on that day, the thing must pass off.” It was clear to Mr. Furnival that even Mr. Round junior would be glad that it should pass off. And then he also sat thinking. Might it not be probable that, with a little judicious exercise of their memory, those two witnesses would remember that they had signed two documents; or at any rate, looking to the lapse of the time, that they might be induced to forget altogether whether they had signed one, two, or three? Or even if they could be mystified so that nothing could be proved, it would still be well with his client. Indeed no magistrate would commit such a person as Lady Mason, especially after so long an interval, and no grand jury would find a bill against her, except upon evidence that was clear, well defined, and almost indubitable. If any point of doubt could be shown, she might be brought off without a trial, if only she would be true to herself. At the former trial there was the existing codicil, and the fact also that the two surviving reputed witnesses would not deny their signatures. These signatures⁠—if they were genuine signatures⁠—had been attached with all proper formality, and the form used went to state that the testator had signed the instrument in the presence of them all, they all being present together at the same time. The survivors had both asserted that when they did affix their names the three were then present, as was also Sir Joseph; but there had been a terrible doubt even then as to the identity of the document; and a doubt also as to there having been any signature made by one of the reputed witnesses⁠—by that one, namely, who at the time of that trial was dead. Now another document was forthcoming, purporting to have been witnessed, on the same day, by these two surviving witnesses! If that document were genuine, and if these two survivors should be clear that they had written their names but once on that 14th of July, in such case could it be possible to quash further public inquiry? The criminal prosecution might not be possible as a first proceeding, but if the estate were recovered at common law, would not the criminal prosecution follow as a matter of course? And then Mr. Furnival thought it all over again and again.</p>
			<p>If this document were genuine⁠—this new document which the man Dockwrath stated that he had found⁠—this deed of separation of partnership which purported to have been executed on that 14th of July! That was now the one important question. If it were genuine! And why should there not be as strong a question of the honesty of that document as of the other? Mr. Furnival well knew that no fraudulent deed would be forged and produced without a motive; and that if he impugned this deed he must show the motive. Motive enough there was, no doubt. Mason might have had it forged in order to get the property, or Dockwrath to gratify his revenge. But in such case it would be a forgery of the present day. There could have been no motive for such a forgery twenty years ago. The paper, the writing, the attested signature of Martock, the other party to it, would prove that it had not been got up and manufactured now. Dockwrath would not dare to bring forward such a forgery as that. There was no hope of any such result.</p>
			<p>But might not he, Furnival, if the matter were pushed before a jury, make them think that the two documents stood balanced against each other? and that Lady Mason’s respectability, her long possession, together with the vile malignity of her antagonists, gave the greater probability of honesty to the disputed codicil? Mr. Furnival did think that he might induce a jury to acquit her; but he terribly feared that he might not be able to induce the world to acquit her also. As he thought of all the case, he seemed to put himself apart from the world at large. He did not question himself as to his own belief, but seemed to feel that it would suffice for him if he could so bring it about that her other friends should think her innocent. It would by no means suffice for him to secure for her son the property, and for her a simple acquittal. It was not that he dreaded the idea of thinking her guilty himself; perhaps he did so think her now⁠—he half thought her so, at any rate; but he greatly dreaded the idea of others thinking so. It might be well to buy up Dockwrath, if it were possible. If it were possible! But then it was not possible that he himself could have a hand in such a matter. Could Crabwitz do it? No; he thought not. And then, at this moment, he was not certain that he could depend on Crabwitz.</p>
			<p>And why should he trouble himself in this way? Mr. Furnival was a man loyal to his friends at heart. Had Lady Mason been a man, and had he pulled that man through great difficulties in early life, he would have been loyally desirous of carrying him through the same or similar difficulties at any after period. In that cause which he had once battled he was always ready to do battle, without reference to any professional consideration of triumph or profit. It was to this feeling of loyalty that he had owed much of his success in life. And in such a case as this it may be supposed that that feeling would be strong. But then such a feeling presumed a case in which he could sympathise⁠—in which he could believe. Would it be well that he should allow himself to feel the same interest in this case, to maintain respecting it the same personal anxiety, if he ceased to believe in it? He did ask himself the question, and he finally answered it in the affirmative. He had beaten Joseph Mason once in a good stand-up fight; and having done so, having thus made the matter his own, it was necessary to his comfort that he should beat him again, if another fight were to be fought. Lady Mason was his client, and all the associations of his life taught him to be true to her as such.</p>
			<p>And as we are thus searching into his innermost heart we must say more than this. Mrs. Furnival perhaps had no sufficient grounds for those terrible fears of hers; but nevertheless the mistress of Orley Farm was very comely in the eyes of the lawyer. Her eyes, when full of tears, were very bright, and her hand, as it lay in his, was very soft. He laid out for himself no scheme of wickedness with reference to her; he purposely entertained no thoughts which he knew to be wrong; but, nevertheless, he did feel that he liked to have her by him, that he liked to be her adviser and friend, that he liked to wipe the tears from those eyes⁠—not by a material handkerchief from his pocket, but by immaterial manly sympathy from his bosom; and that he liked also to feel the pressure of that hand. Mrs. Furnival had become solid, and heavy, and red; and though he himself was solid, and heavy, and red also⁠—more so, indeed, in proportion than his poor wife, for his redness, as I have said before, had almost reached a purple hue; nevertheless his eye loved to look upon the beauty of a lovely woman, his ear loved to hear the tone of her voice, and his hand loved to meet the soft ripeness of her touch. It was very wrong that it should have been so, but the case is not without a parallel.</p>
			<p>And therefore he made up his mind that he would not desert Lady Mason. He would not desert her; but how would he set about the fighting that would be necessary in her behalf? He was well aware of this, that if he fought at all, he must fight now. It would not do to let the matter go on till she should be summoned to defend herself. Steps which might now be available would be altogether unavailable in two or three months’ time⁠—would be so, perhaps, if he allowed two or three weeks to pass idly by him. Mr. Round, luckily, was not disposed to hurry his proceedings; nor, as far as he was concerned, was there any bitterness of antagonism. But with both Mason and Dockwrath there would be hot haste, and hotter malice. From those who were really her enemies she could expect no quarter.</p>
			<p>He was to return on that evening to Noningsby, and on the following day he would go over to The Cleeve. He knew that Lady Mason was staying there; but his object in making that visit would not be merely that he might see her, but also that he might speak to Sir Peregrine, and learn how far the baronet was inclined to support his neighbour in her coming tribulation. He would soon be able to ascertain what Sir Peregrine really thought⁠—whether he suspected the possibility of any guilt; and he would ascertain also what was the general feeling in the neighbourhood of Hamworth. It would be a great thing if he could spread abroad a conviction that she was an injured woman. It would be a great thing even if he could make it known that the great people of the neighbourhood so thought. The jurymen of Alston would be mortal men; and it might be possible that they should be imbued with a favourable bias on the subject before they assembled in their box for its consideration.</p>
			<p>He wished that he knew the truth in the matter; or rather he wished he could know whether or no she were innocent, without knowing whether or no she were guilty. The fight in his hands would be conducted on terms so much more glorious if he could feel sure of her innocence. But then if he attempted that, and she were not innocent, all might be sacrificed by the audacity of his proceedings. He could not venture that, unless he were sure of his ground. For a moment or two he thought that he would ask her the question. He said to himself that he could forgive the fault. That it had been repented ere this he did not doubt, and it would be sweet to say to her that it was very grievous, but that yet it might be forgiven. It would be sweet to feel that she was in his hands, and that he would treat her with mercy and kindness. But then a hundred other thoughts forbade him to think more of this. If she had been, guilty⁠—if she declared her guilt to him⁠—would not restitution be necessary? In that case her son must know it, and all the world must know it. Such a confession would be incompatible with that innocence before the world which it was necessary that she should maintain. Moreover, he must be able to proclaim aloud his belief in her innocence; and how could he do that, knowing her to be guilty⁠—knowing that she also knew that he had such knowledge? It was impossible that he should ask any such question, or admit of any such confidence.</p>
			<p>It would be necessary, if the case did come to a trial, that she should employ some attorney. The matter must come into the barrister’s hands in the usual way, through a solicitor’s house, and it would be well that the person employed should have a firm faith in his client. What could he say⁠—he, as a barrister⁠—if the attorney suggested to him that the lady might possibly be guilty? As he thought of all these things he almost dreaded the difficulties before him.</p>
			<p>He rang the bell for Crabwitz⁠—the peculiar bell which Crabwitz was bound to answer⁠—having first of all gone through a little ceremony with his cheque-book. Crabwitz entered, still sulky in his demeanour, for as yet the old anger had not been appeased, and it was still a doubtful matter in the clerk’s mind whether or no it might not be better for him to seek a master who would better appreciate his services. A more lucrative position it might be difficult for him to find; but money is not everything, as Crabwitz said to himself more than once.</p>
			<p>“Crabwitz,” said Mr. Furnival, looking with a pleasant face at his clerk, “I am leaving town this evening, and I shall be absent for the next ten days. If you like you can go away for a holiday.”</p>
			<p>“It’s rather late in the season now, sir,” said Crabwitz, gloomily, as though he were determined not to be pleased.</p>
			<p>“It is a little late, as you say; but I really could not manage it earlier. Come, Crabwitz, you and I should not quarrel. Your work has been a little hard, but then so has mine also.”</p>
			<p>“I fancy you like it, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Ha! ha! Like it, indeed! But so do you like it⁠—in its way. Come, Crabwitz, you have been an excellent servant to me; and I don’t think that, on the whole, I have been a bad master to you.”</p>
			<p>“I am making no complaint, sir.”</p>
			<p>“But you’re cross because I’ve kept you in town a little too long. Come, Crabwitz, you must forget all that. You have worked very hard this year past. Here is a cheque for fifty pounds. Get out of town for a fortnight or so, and amuse yourself.”</p>
			<p>“I’m sure I’m very much obliged, sir,” said Crabwitz, putting out his hand and taking the cheque. He felt that his master had got the better of him, and he was still a little melancholy on that account. He would have valued his grievance at that moment almost more than the fifty pounds, especially as by the acceptance of it he surrendered all right to complain for some considerable time to come.</p>
			<p>“By-the-by, Crabwitz,” said Mr. Furnival, as the clerk was about to leave the room.</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir,” said Crabwitz.</p>
			<p>“You have never chanced to hear of an attorney named Dockwrath, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“What! in London, Mr. Furnival?”</p>
			<p>“No; I fancy he has no place of business in town. He lives I know at Hamworth.”</p>
			<p>“It’s he you mean, sir, that is meddling in this affair of Lady Mason’s.”</p>
			<p>“What! you have heard of that; have you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! yes, sir. It’s being a good deal talked about in the profession. Messrs. Round and Crook’s leading young man was up here with me the other day, and he did say a good deal about it. He’s a very decent young man, considering his position, is Smart.”</p>
			<p>“And he knows Dockwrath, does he?”</p>
			<p>“Well, sir, I can’t say that he knows much of the man; but Dockwrath has been at their place of business pretty constant of late, and he and Mr. Matthew seem thick enough together.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! they do; do they?”</p>
			<p>“So Smart tells me. I don’t know how it is myself, sir. I don’t suppose this Dockwrath is a <span class="nowrap">very⁠—”</span></p>
			<p>“No, no; exactly. I dare say not. You’ve never seen him yourself, Crabwitz?”</p>
			<p>“Who, sir? I, sir? No, sir, I’ve never set eyes on the man, sir. From all I hear it’s not very likely he should come here; and I’m sure it is not at all likely that I should go to him.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Furnival sat thinking awhile, and the clerk stood waiting opposite to him, leaning with both his hands upon the table. “You don’t know any one in the neighbourhood of Hamworth, I suppose?” Mr. Furnival said at last.</p>
			<p>“Who, sir? I, sir? Not a soul, sir. I never was there in my life.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll tell you why I ask. I strongly suspect that that man Dockwrath is at some very foul play.” And then he told to his clerk so much of the whole story of Lady Mason and her affairs as he chose that he should know. “It is plain enough that he may give Lady Mason a great deal of annoyance,” he ended by saying.</p>
			<p>“There’s no doubting that, sir,” said Crabwitz. “And, to tell the truth, I believe his mind is made up to do it.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t think that anything could be done by seeing him? Of course Lady Mason has got nothing to compromise. Her son’s estate is as safe as my hat; <span class="nowrap">but⁠—”</span></p>
			<p>“The people at Round’s think it isn’t quite so safe, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Then the people at Round’s know nothing about it. But Lady Mason is so averse to legal proceedings that it would be worth her while to have matters settled. You understand?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir; I understand. Would not an attorney be the best person, sir?”</p>
			<p>“Not just at present, Crabwitz. Lady Mason is a very dear friend of <span class="nowrap">mine⁠—”</span></p>
			<p>“Yes, sir; we know that,” said Crabwitz.</p>
			<p>“If you could make any pretence for running down to Hamworth⁠—change of air, you know, for a week or so. It’s a beautiful country; just the place you like. And you might find out whether anything could be done, eh?”</p>
			<p>Mr. Crabwitz was well aware, from the first, that he did not get fifty pounds for nothing.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
