<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Convivial Meeting</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On the whole <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath was satisfied with the results of his trip to Groby Park, and was in a contented frame of mind as he was driven back to Leeds. No doubt it would have been better could he have persuaded <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason to throw over <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Round and Crook, and put himself altogether into the hands of his new adviser; but this had been too much to expect. He had not expected it, and had made the suggestion as the surest means of getting the best terms in his power, rather than with a hope of securing the actual advantage named. He had done much towards impressing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason with an idea of his own sharpness, and perhaps something also towards breaking the prestige which surrounded the names of the great London firm. He would now go to that firm and make his terms with them. They would probably be quite as ready to acquiesce in the importance of his information as had been <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason.</p>
			<p>Before leaving the inn after breakfast he had agreed to join the dinner in the commercial room at five o’clock, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason’s hot lunch had by no means induced him to alter his purpose. “I shall dine here,” he had said when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder was discussing with the waiter the all-important subject of dinner. “At the commercial table sir?” the waiter had asked, doubtingly. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath had answered boldly in the affirmative, whereat <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder had growled; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise had expressed satisfaction. “We shall be extremely happy to enjoy your company,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise had said, with a graceful bow, making up by his excessive courtesy for the want of any courtesy on the part of his brother-traveller. With reference to all this <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder said nothing; the stranger had been admitted into the room, to a certain extent even with his own consent, and he could not now be turned out; but he resolved within his own mind that for the future he would be more firm in maintaining the ordinances and institutes of his profession.</p>
			<p>On his road home, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath had encountered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise going to Groby Park, intent on his sale of a drawing-room set of the metallic furniture; and when he again met him in the commercial room he asked after his success. “A wonderful woman that, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise, “a really wonderful woman; no particular friend of yours I think you say?”</p>
			<p>“None in the least, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise,”</p>
			<p>“Then I may make bold to assert that for persevering sharpness she beats all that I ever met, even in Yorkshire;” and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise looked at his new friend over his shoulder, and shook his head as though lost in wonder and admiration. “What do you think she’s done now?”</p>
			<p>“She didn’t give you much to eat, I take it.”</p>
			<p>“Much to eat! I’ll tell you what it is, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath; my belief is that woman would have an absolute pleasure in starving a Christian; I do indeed. I’ll tell you what she has done; she has made me put her up a set of them things at twelve, seventeen, six! I needn’t tell you that they were never made for the money.”</p>
			<p>“Why, then, did you part with them at a loss?”</p>
			<p>“Well; that’s the question. I was soft, I suppose. She got round me, badgering me, till I didn’t know where I was. She wanted them as a present for the curate’s wife, she said. Whatever should induce her to make a present!”</p>
			<p>“She got them for twelve, seventeen, six; did she?” said Dockwrath, thinking that it might be as well to remember this, if he should feel inclined to make a purchase himself.</p>
			<p>“But they was strained, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath; I must admit they was strained⁠—particularly the loo.”</p>
			<p>“You had gone through your gymnastics on it a little too often?” asked the attorney. But this <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise would not acknowledge. The strength of that table was such that he could stand on it forever without injury to it; but nevertheless, in some other way it had become strained, and therefore he had sold the set to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mason for £12 17<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>, that lady being minded to make a costly present to the wife of the curate of Groby.</p>
			<p>When dinnertime came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath found that the party was swelled to the number of eight, five other undoubted commercials having brought themselves to anchor at the Bull Inn during the day. To all of these, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise introduced him. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath,” said he, gracefully moving towards them the palm of his hand, and eyeing them over his shoulder. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape is in the stationery line,” he added, in a whisper to the attorney, “and does for Cumming and Jibber of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Churchyard. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">J.</abbr> is from Sheffield. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snengkeld, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath;” and then he imparted in another whisper the necessary information as to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snengkeld. “Soft goods, for Brown Brothers, of Snow Hill,” and so on through the whole fraternity. Each member bowed as his name was mentioned; but they did not do so very graciously, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise was not a great man among them. Had the stranger been introduced to them by Moulder⁠—Moulder the patriarch⁠—his reception among them would have been much warmer. And then they sat down to dinner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder taking the chair as president, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise sitting opposite to him, as being the longest sojourner at the inn. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath sat at the right hand of Kantwise, discreetly avoiding the neighbourhood of Moulder, and the others ranged themselves according to fancy at the table. “Come up along side of me, old fellow,” Moulder said to Snengkeld. “It ain’t the first time that you and I have smacked our lips together over the same bit of roast beef.” “Nor won’t, I hope, be the last by a long chalk, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder,” said Snengkeld, speaking with a deep, hoarse voice which seemed to ascend from some region of his body far below his chest. Moulder and Snengkeld were congenial spirits; but the latter, though the older man, was not endowed with so large a volume of body or so highly dominant a spirit. Brown Brothers, of Snow Hill, were substantial people, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snengkeld travelled in strict accordance with the good old rules of trade which Moulder loved so well.</p>
			<p>The politeness and general good manners of the company were something very pretty to witness. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath, as a stranger, was helped first, and every courtesy was shown to him. Even <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder carved the beef for him with a loving hand, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise was almost subservient in his attention. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath thought that he had certainly done right in coming to the commercial table, and resolved on doing so on all occasions of future journeys. So far all was good. The commercial dinner, as he had ascertained, would cost him only two shillings, and a much inferior repast eaten by himself elsewhere would have stood in his bill for three. So far all was good; but the test by which he was to be tried was now approaching him.</p>
			<p>When the dinner was just half over⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder well knew how to mark the time⁠—that gentleman called for the waiter, and whispered an important order into that functionary’s ears. The functionary bowed, retired from the room, and reappeared again in two minutes, bearing a bottle of sherry in each hand; one of these he deposited at the right hand of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder; and the other at the right hand of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder, addressing himself with great ceremony to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath, “the honour of a glass of wine with you, sir,” and the president, to give more importance to the occasion, put down his knife and fork, leaned back in his chair, and put both his hands upon his waistcoat, looking intently at the attorney out of his little eyes.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath was immediately aware that a crisis had come upon him which demanded an instant decision. If he complied with the president’s invitation he would have to pay his proportion of all the wine bill that might be incurred that evening by the seven commercial gentlemen at the table, and he knew well that commercial gentlemen do sometimes call for bottle after bottle with a reckless disregard of expense. But to him, with his sixteen children, wine at an hotel was terrible. A pint of beer and a glass of brandy and water were the luxuries which he had promised himself, and with manly fortitude he resolved that he would not be coerced into extravagance by any president or any Moulder.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said he, “I’m obliged by the honour, but I don’t drink wine to my dinner.” Whereupon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder bowed his head very solemnly, winked at Snengkeld, and then drank wine with that gentleman.</p>
			<p>“It’s the rule of the room,” whispered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath’s ear; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath pretended not to hear him, and the matter was allowed to pass by for the time.</p>
			<p>But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snengkeld asked him for the honour, as also did <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape, who sat at Moulder’s left hand; and then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath began to wax angry. “I think I remarked before that I don’t drink wine to my dinner,” he said; and then the three at the president’s end of the table all looked at each other very solemnly, and they all winked; and after that there was very little conversation during the remainder of the meal, for men knew that the goddess of discord was in the air.</p>
			<p>The cheese came, and with that a bottle of port wine, which was handed round, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath of course refusing to join in the conviviality; and then the cloth was drawn, and the decanters were put before the president. “James, bring me a little brandy-and-water,” said the attorney, striving to put a bold face on the matter, but yet speaking with diminished voice.</p>
			<p>“Half a moment, if you please, sir,” said Moulder; and then he exclaimed with stentorian voice, “James, the dinner bill.” “Yes, sir,” said the waiter, and disappeared without any thought towards the requisition for brandy-and-water from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>For the next five minutes they all remained silent, except that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder gave the Queen’s health as he filled his glass and pushed the bottles from him. “Gentlemen, the Queen,” and then he lifted his glass of port up to the light, shut one eye as he looked at it, and immediately swallowed the contents as though he were taking a dose of physic. “I’m afraid they’ll charge you for the wine,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise, again whispering to his neighbour. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath paid no apparent attention to what was said to him. He was concentrating his energies with a view to the battle.</p>
			<p>James, the waiter, soon returned. He also knew well what was about to happen, and he trembled as he handed in the document to the president. “Let’s have it, James,” said Moulder, with much pleasantry, as he took the paper in his hand. “The old ticket I suppose; five bob a head.” And then he read out the bill, the total of which, wine and beer included, came to forty shillings. “Five shillings a head, gentlemen, as I said. You and I can make a pretty good guess as to the figure; eh, Snengkeld?” And then he put down his two half-crowns on the waiter, as also did <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snengkeld, and then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape, and so on till it came to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise.</p>
			<p>“I think you and I will leave it, and settle at the bar,” said Kantwise, appealing to Dockwrath, and intending peace if peace were still possible.</p>
			<p>“No,” shouted Moulder, from the other end of the table; “let the man have his money now, and then his troubles will be over. If there’s to be any fuss about it, let’s have it out. I like to see the dinner bill settled as soon as the dinner is eaten. Then one gets an appetite for one’s supper.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think I have the change,” said Kantwise, still putting off the evil day.</p>
			<p>“I’ll lend, it you,” said Moulder, putting his hand into his trousers-pockets. But the money was forthcoming out of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise’s own proper repositories, and with slow motion he put down the five shillings one after the other.</p>
			<p>And then the waiter came to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath. “What’s this?” said the attorney, taking up the bill and looking at it. The whole matter had been sufficiently explained to him, but nevertheless <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder explained it again. “In commercial rooms, sir, as no doubt you must be well aware, seeing that you have done us the honour of joining us here, the dinner bill is divided equally among all the gentlemen as sit down. It’s the rule of the room, sir. You has what you like, and you calls for what you like, and conwiviality is thereby encouraged. The figure generally comes to five shillings, and you afterwards gives what you like to the waiter. That’s about it, ain’t it, James?”</p>
			<p>“That’s the rule, sir, in all commercial rooms as I ever see,” said the waiter.</p>
			<p>The matter had been so extremely well put by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder, and that gentleman’s words had carried with them so much conviction, that Dockwrath felt himself almost tempted to put down the money; as far as his sixteen children and general ideas of economy were concerned he would have done so; but his legal mind could not bear to be beaten. The spirit of litigation within him told him that the point was to be carried. Moulder, Gape, and Snengkeld together could not make him pay for wine he had neither ordered nor swallowed. His pocket was guarded by the law of the land, and not by the laws of any special room in which he might chance to find himself. “I shall pay two shillings for my dinner,” said he, “and sixpence for my beer;” and then he deposited the half-crown.</p>
			<p>“Do you mean us to understand,” said Moulder, “that after forcing your way into this room, and sitting down along with gentlemen at this table, you refuse to abide by the rules of the room?” And <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder spoke and looked as though he thought that such treachery must certainly lead to most disastrous results. The disastrous result which a stranger might have expected at the moment would be a fit of apoplexy on the part of the worthy president.</p>
			<p>“I neither ordered that wine nor did I drink it,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath, compressing his lips, leaning back in his chair, and looking up into one corner of the ceiling.</p>
			<p>“The gentleman certainly did not drink the wine,” said Kantwise, “I must acknowledge that; and as for ordering it, why that was done by the president, in course.”</p>
			<p>“Gammon!” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder, and he fixed his eyes steadfastly upon his Vice. “Kantwise, that’s gammon. The most of what you says is gammon.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder, I don’t exactly know what you mean by that word gammon, but it’s objectionable. To my feelings it’s very objectionable. I say that the gentleman did not drink the wine, and I appeal to the gentleman who sits at the gentleman’s right, whether what I say is not correct. If what I say is correct, it can’t be⁠—gammon. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Busby, did that gentleman drink the wine, or did he not?”</p>
			<p>“Not as I see,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Busby, somewhat nervous at being thus brought into the controversy. He was a young man just commencing his travels, and stood in awe of the great Moulder.</p>
			<p>“Gammon!” shouted Moulder, with a very red face. “Everybody at the table knows he didn’t drink the wine. Everybody saw that he declined the honour when proposed, which I don’t know that I ever saw a gentleman do at a commercial table till this day, barring that he was a teetotaller, which is gammon too. But it’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.P.</abbr> here, as every commercial gentleman knows, Kantwise as well as the best of us.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.P.</abbr>, that’s the rule,” growled Snengkeld, almost from under the table.</p>
			<p>“In commercial rooms, as the gentleman must be aware, the rule is as stated by my friend on my right,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape. “The wine is ordered by the president or chairman, and is paid for in equal proportions by the company or guests,” and in his oratory <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape laid great stress on the word “or.” “The gentleman will easily perceive that such a rule as this is necessary in such a society; and unless⁠—”</p>
			<p>But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape was apt to make long speeches, and therefore <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder interrupted him. “You had better pay your five shillings, sir, and have no jaw about it. The man is standing idle there.”</p>
			<p>“It’s not the value of the money,” said Dockwrath, “but I must decline to acknowledge that I am amenable to the jurisdiction.”</p>
			<p>“There has clearly been a mistake,” said Johnson from Sheffield, “and we had better settle it among us; anything is better than a row.” Johnson from Sheffield was a man somewhat inclined to dispute the supremacy of Moulder from Houndsditch.</p>
			<p>“No, Johnson,” said the president. “Anything is not better than a row. A premeditated infraction of our rules is not better than a row.”</p>
			<p>“Did you say premeditated?” said Kantwise. “I think not premeditated.”</p>
			<p>“I did say premeditated, and I say it again.”</p>
			<p>“It looks uncommon like it,” said Snengkeld.</p>
			<p>“When a gentleman,” said Gape, “who does not belong to a society⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It’s no good having more talk,” said Moulder, “and we’ll soon bring this to an end. <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠—; I haven’t the honour of knowing the gentleman’s name.”</p>
			<p>“My name is Dockwrath, and I am a solicitor.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, a solicitor; are you? and you said last night you was commercial! Will you be good enough to tell us, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solicitor⁠—for I didn’t just catch your name, except that it begins with a dock⁠—and that’s where most of your clients are to be found, I suppose⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Order, order, order!” said Kantwise, holding up both his hands.</p>
			<p>“It’s the chair as is speaking,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape, who had a true Englishman’s notion that the chair itself could not be called to order.</p>
			<p>“You shouldn’t insult the gentleman because he has his own ideas,” said Johnson.</p>
			<p>“I don’t want to insult no one,” continued Moulder; “and those who know me best, among whom I can’t as yet count <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson, though hopes I shall some day, won’t say it of me.” “Hear⁠—hear⁠—hear!” from both Snengkeld and Gape; to which Kantwise added a little “hear⁠—hear!” of his own, of which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder did not quite approve. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snengkeld and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape, they’re my old friends, and they knows me. And they knows the way of a commercial room⁠—which some gentlemen don’t seem as though they do. I don’t want to insult no one; but as chairman here at this conwivial meeting, I asks that gentleman who says he is a solicitor whether he means to pay his dinner bill according to the rules of the room, or whether he don’t?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve paid for what I’ve had already,” said Dockwrath, “and I don’t mean to pay for what I’ve not had.”</p>
			<p>“James,” exclaimed Moulder⁠—and all the chairman was in his voice as he spoke⁠—“my compliments to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump, and I will request his attendance for five minutes;” and then James left the room, and there was silence for a while, during which the bottles made their round of the table.</p>
			<p>“Hadn’t we better send back the pint of wine which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath hasn’t used?” suggested Kantwise.</p>
			<p>“I’m d⁠⸺ if we do!” replied Moulder, with much energy; and the general silence was not again broken till <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump made his appearance; but the chairman whispered a private word or two to his friend Snengkeld. “I never sent back ordered liquor to the bar yet, unless it was bad; and I’m not going to begin now.”</p>
			<p>And then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump came in. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump was a very clean-looking person, without any beard; and dressed from head to foot in black. He was about fifty, with grizzly gray hair, which stood upright on his head, and his face at the present moment wore on it an innkeeper’s smile. But it could also assume an innkeeper’s frown, and on occasions did so⁠—when bills were disputed, or unreasonable strangers thought that they knew the distance in posting miles round the neighbourhood of Leeds better than did he, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump, who had lived at the Bull Inn all his life. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump rarely frowned on commercial gentlemen, from whom was derived the main stay of his business and the main prop of his house.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump,” began Moulder, “here has occurred a very unpleasant transaction.”</p>
			<p>“I know all about it, gentlemen,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump. “The waiter has acquainted me, and I can assure you, gentlemen, that I am extremely sorry that anything should have arisen to disturb the harmony of your dinner-table.”</p>
			<p>“We must now call upon you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump,” began <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder, who was about to demand that Dockwrath should be turned bodily out of the room.</p>
			<p>“If you’ll allow me one moment, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder,” continued <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump, “and I’ll tell you what is my suggestion. The gentleman here, who I understand is a lawyer, does not wish to comply with the rules of the commercial room.”</p>
			<p>“I certainly don’t wish or intend to pay for drink that I didn’t order and haven’t had,” said Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>“Exactly,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump. “And therefore, gentlemen, to get out of the difficulty, we’ll presume, if you please, that the bill is paid.”</p>
			<p>“The lawyer, as you call him, will have to leave the room,” said Moulder.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he will not object to step over to the coffee-room on the other side,” suggested the landlord.</p>
			<p>“I can’t think of leaving my seat here under such circumstances,” said Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>“You can’t,” said Moulder. “Then you must be made, as I take it.”</p>
			<p>“Let me see the man that will make me,” said Dockwrath.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump looked very apologetic and not very comfortable. “There is a difficulty, gentlemen; there is a difficulty, indeed,” he said. “The fact is, the gentleman should not have been showed into the room at all;” and he looked very angrily at his own servant, James.</p>
			<p>“He said he was ’mercial,” said James. “So he did. Now he says as how he’s a lawyer. What’s a poor man to do?”</p>
			<p>“I’m a commercial lawyer,” said Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>“He must leave the room, or I shall leave the house,” said Moulder.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, gentlemen!” said Crump. “This kind of thing does not happen often, and on this occasion I must try your kind patience. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder would allow me to suggest that the commercial gentlemen should take their wine in the large drawing-room upstairs this evening, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">C.</abbr> will do her best to make it comfortable for them in five minutes. There of course they can be private.”</p>
			<p>There was something in the idea of leaving <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath alone in his glory which appeased the spirit of the great Moulder. He had known Crump, moreover, for many years, and was aware that it would be a dangerous, and probably an expensive proceeding to thrust out the attorney by violence. “If the other gentlemen are agreeable, I am,” said he. The other gentlemen were agreeable, and, with the exception of Kantwise, they all rose from their chairs.</p>
			<p>“I must say I think you ought to leave the room as you don’t choose to abide by the rules,” said Johnson, addressing himself to Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>“That’s your opinion,” said Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is,” said Johnson. “That’s my opinion.”</p>
			<p>“My own happens to be different,” said Dockwrath; and so he kept his chair.</p>
			<p>“There, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump,” said Moulder, taking half a crown from his pocket and throwing it on the table. “I shan’t see you at a loss.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump; and he very humbly took up the money.</p>
			<p>“I keep a little account for charity at home,” said Moulder.</p>
			<p>“It don’t run very high, do it?” asked Snengkeld, jocosely.</p>
			<p>“Not out of the way, it don’t. But now I shall have the pleasure of writing down in it that I paid half a crown for a lawyer who couldn’t afford to settle his own dinner bill. Sir, we have the pleasure of wishing you a good night.”</p>
			<p>“I hope you’ll find the large drawing-room upstairs quite comfortable,” said Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>And then they all marched out of the room, each with his own glass, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder leading the way with stately step. It was pleasant to see them as they all followed their leader across the open passage of the gateway, in by the bar, and so up the chief staircase. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moulder walked slowly, bearing the bottle of port and his own glass, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snengkeld and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gape followed in line, bearing also their own glasses, and maintaining the dignity of their profession under circumstances of some difficulty.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, I really am sorry for this little accident,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crump, as they were passing the bar; “but a lawyer, you know⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And such a lawyer, eh, Crump?” said Moulder.</p>
			<p>“It might be five-and-twenty pound to me to lay a hand on him!” said the landlord.</p>
			<p>When the time came for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kantwise to move, he considered the matter well. The chances, however, as he calculated them, were against any profitable business being done with the attorney, so he also left the room. “Good night, sir,” he said as he went. “I wish you a very good night.”</p>
			<p>“Take care of yourself,” said Dockwrath; and then the attorney spent the rest of the evening alone.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
