<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Staveley Family</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The next two months passed by without any events which deserve our special notice, unless it be that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Joseph Mason and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath had a meeting in the room of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Matthew Round, in Bedford Row. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath struggled hard to effect this without the presence of the London attorney; but he struggled in vain. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round was not the man to allow any stranger to tamper with his client, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath was forced to lower his flag before him. The result was that the document or documents which had been discovered at Hamworth were brought up to Bedford Row; and Dockwrath at last made up his mind that as he could not supplant Matthew Round, he would consent to fight under him as his lieutenant⁠—or even as his sergeant or corporal, if no higher position might be allowed to him.</p>
			<p>“There is something in it, certainly, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason,” said young Round; “but I cannot undertake to say as yet that we are in a position to prove the point.”</p>
			<p>“It will be proved,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath.</p>
			<p>“I confess it seems to me very clear,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason, who by this time had been made to understand the bearings of the question. “It is evident that she chose that day for her date because those two persons had then been called upon to act as witnesses to that other deed.”</p>
			<p>“That of course is our allegation. I only say that we may have some difficulty in proving it.”</p>
			<p>“The crafty, thieving swindler!” exclaimed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason. “She has been sharp enough if it is as we think,” said Round, laughing; and then there was nothing more done in the matter for some time, to the great disgust both of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason. Old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Round had kept his promise to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival; or, at least, had done something towards keeping it. He had not himself taken the matter into his own hands, but he had begged his son to be cautious. “It’s not the sort of business that we care for, Mat,” said he; “and as for that fellow down in Yorkshire, I never liked him.” To this Mat had answered that neither did he like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason; but as the case had about it some very remarkable points, it was necessary to look into it; and then the matter was allowed to stand over till after Christmas.</p>
			<p>We will now change the scene to Noningsby, the judge’s country seat, near Alston, at which a party was assembled for the Christmas holidays. The judge was there of course⁠—without his wig; in which guise I am inclined to think that judges spend the more comfortable hours of their existence; and there also was Lady Staveley, her presence at home being altogether a matter of course, inasmuch as she had no other home than Noningsby. For many years past, ever since the happy day on which Noningsby had been acquired, she had repudiated London; and the poor judge, when called upon by his duties to reside there, was compelled to live like a bachelor, in lodgings. Lady Staveley was a good, motherly, warmhearted woman, who thought a great deal about her flowers and fruit, believing that no one else had them so excellent⁠—much also about her butter and eggs, which in other houses were, in her opinion, generally unfit to be eaten; she thought also a great deal about her children, who were all swans⁠—though, as she often observed with a happy sigh, those of her neighbours were so uncommonly like geese. But she thought most of all of her husband, who in her eyes was the perfection of all manly virtues. She had made up her mind that the position of a puisne judge in England was the highest which could fall to the lot of any mere mortal. To become a Lord Chancellor, or a Lord Chief Justice, or a Chief Baron, a man must dabble with Parliament, politics, and dirt; but the bench-fellows of these politicians were selected for their wisdom, high conduct, knowledge, and discretion. Of all such selections, that made by the late king when he chose her husband, was the one which had done most honour to England, and had been in all its results most beneficial to Englishmen. Such was her creed with reference to domestic matters.</p>
			<p>The Staveley young people at present were only two in number, Augustus, namely, and his sister Madeline. The eldest daughter was married, and therefore, though she spent these Christmas holidays at Noningsby, must not be regarded as one of the Noningsby family. Of Augustus we have said enough; but as I intend that Madeline Staveley shall, to many of my readers, be the most interesting personage in this story, I must pause to say something of her. I must say something of her; and as, with all women, the outward and visible signs of grace and beauty are those which are thought of the most, or at any rate spoken of the oftenest, I will begin with her exterior attributes. And that the muses may assist me in my endeavour, teaching my rough hands to draw with some accuracy the delicate lines of female beauty, I now make to them my humble but earnest prayer.</p>
			<p>Madeline Staveley was at this time about nineteen years of age. That she was perfect in her beauty I cannot ask the muses to say, but that she will some day become so, I think the goddesses may be requested to prophesy. At present she was very slight, and appeared to be almost too tall for her form. She was indeed above the average height of women, and from her brother encountered some ridicule on this head; but not the less were all her movements soft, graceful, and fawnlike as should be those of a young girl. She was still at this time a child in heart and spirit, and could have played as a child had not the instinct of a woman taught to her the expediency of a staid demeanour. There is nothing among the wonders of womanhood more wonderful than this, that the young mind and young heart⁠—hearts and minds young as youth can make them, and in their natures as gay⁠—can assume the gravity and discretion of threescore years and maintain it successfully before all comers. And this is done, not as a lesson that has been taught, but as the result of an instinct implanted from the birth. Let us remember the mirth of our sisters in our homes, and their altered demeanours when those homes were opened to strangers; and remember also that this change had come from the inward working of their own feminine natures!</p>
			<p>But I am altogether departing from Madeline Staveley’s external graces. It was a pity almost that she should ever have become grave, because with her it was her smile that was so lovely. She smiled with her whole face. There was at such moments a peculiar laughing light in her gray eyes, which inspired one with an earnest desire to be in her confidence; she smiled with her soft cheek, the light tints of which would become a shade more pink from the excitement, as they softly rippled into dimples; she smiled with her forehead which would catch the light from her eyes and arch itself in its glory; but above all she smiled with her mouth, just showing, but hardly showing, the beauty of the pearls within. I never saw the face of a woman whose mouth was equal in pure beauty, in beauty that was expressive of feeling, to that of Madeline Staveley. Many have I seen with a richer lip, with a more luxurious curve, much more tempting as baits to the villainy and rudeness of man; but never one that told so much by its own mute eloquence of a woman’s happy heart and a woman’s happy beauty. It was lovely as I have said in its mirth, but if possible it was still more lovely in its woe; for then the lips would separate, and the breath would come, and in the emotion of her suffering the life of her beauty would be unrestrained.</p>
			<p>Her face was oval, and some might say that it was almost too thin; they might say so till they knew it well, but would never say so when they did so know it. Her complexion was not clear, though it would be wrong to call her a brunette. Her face and forehead were never brown, but yet she could not boast the pure pink and the pearly white which go to the formation of a clear complexion. For myself I am not sure that I love a clear complexion. Pink and white alone will not give that hue which seems best to denote light and life, and to tell of a mind that thinks and of a heart that feels. I can name no colour in describing the soft changing tints of Madeline Staveley’s face, but I will make bold to say that no man ever found it insipid or inexpressive.</p>
			<p>And now what remains for me to tell? Her nose was Grecian, but perhaps a little too wide at the nostril to be considered perfect in its chiselling. Her hair was soft and brown⁠—that dark brown which by some lights is almost black; but she was not a girl whose loveliness depended much upon her hair. With some women it is their great charm⁠—Neæras who love to sit half sleeping in the shade⁠—but it is a charm that possesses no powerful eloquence. All beauty of a high order should speak, and Madeline’s beauty was ever speaking. And now that I have said that, I believe that I have told all that may be necessary to place her outward form before the inward eyes of my readers.</p>
			<p>In commencing this description I said that I would begin with her exterior; but it seems to me now that in speaking of these I have sufficiently noted also that which was within. Of her actual thoughts and deeds up to this period it is not necessary for our purposes that anything should be told; but of that which she might probably think or might possibly do, a fair guess may, I hope, be made from that which has been already written.</p>
			<p>Such was the Staveley family. Those of their guests whom it is necessary that I should now name, have been already introduced to us. Miss Furnival was there, as was also her father. He had not intended to make any prolonged stay at Noningsby⁠—at least so he had said in his own drawing-room; but nevertheless he had now been there for a week, and it seemed probable that he might stay over Christmas-day. And Felix Graham was there. He had been asked with a special purpose by his friend Augustus, as we already have heard; in order, namely, that he might fall in love with Sophia Furnival, and by the aid of her supposed hatful of money avoid the evils which would otherwise so probably be the consequence of his highly impracticable turn of mind. The judge was not averse to Felix Graham; but as he himself was a man essentially practical in all his views, it often occurred that, in his mild kindly way, he ridiculed the young barrister. And Sir Peregrine Orme was there, being absent from home as on a very rare occasion; and with him of course were <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme and his grandson. Young Perry was making, or was prepared to make, somewhat of a prolonged stay at Noningsby. He had a horse there with him for the hunting, which was changed now and again; his groom going backwards and forwards between that place and The Cleeve. Sir Peregrine, however, intended to return before Christmas, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme would go with him. He had come for four days, which for him had been a long absence from home, and at the end of the four days he would be gone.</p>
			<p>They were all sitting in the dining-room round the luncheon-table on a hopelessly wet morning, listening to a lecture from the judge on the abomination of eating meat in the middle of the day, when a servant came behind young Orme’s chair and told him that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason was in the breakfast-parlour and wished to see him.</p>
			<p>“Who wishes to see you?” said the baronet in a tone of surprise. He had caught the name, and thought at the moment that it was the owner of Groby Park.</p>
			<p>“Lucius Mason,” said Peregrine, getting up. “I wonder what he can want me for?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Lucius Mason,” said the grandfather. Since the discourse about agriculture he was not personally much attached even to Lucius; but for his mother’s sake he could be forgiven.</p>
			<p>“Pray ask him into lunch,” said Lady Staveley. Something had been said about Lady Mason since the Ormes had been at Noningsby, and the Staveley family were prepared to regard her with sympathy, and if necessary with the right hand of fellowship.</p>
			<p>“He is the great agriculturist, is he not?” said Augustus. “Bring him in by all means; there is no knowing how much we may not learn before dinner on such a day as this.”</p>
			<p>“He is an ally of mine; and you must not laugh at him,” said Miss Furnival, who was sitting next to Augustus.</p>
			<p>But Lucius Mason did not come in. Young Orme remained with him for about a quarter of an hour, and then returned to the room, declaring with rather a serious face, that he must ride to Hamworth and back before dinner.</p>
			<p>“Are you going with young Mason?” asked his grandfather.</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir; he wishes me to do something for him at Hamworth, and I cannot well refuse him.”</p>
			<p>“You are not going to fight a duel!” said Lady Staveley, holding up her hands in horror as the idea came across her brain.</p>
			<p>“A duel!” screamed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme. “Oh, Peregrine!”</p>
			<p>“There can be nothing of the sort,” said the judge. “I should think that young Mason is not so foolish; and I am sure that Peregrine Orme is not.”</p>
			<p>“I have not heard of anything of the kind,” said Peregrine, laughing.</p>
			<p>“Promise me, Peregrine,” said his mother. “Say that you promise me.”</p>
			<p>“My dearest mother, I have no more thought of it than you have;⁠—indeed I may say not so much.”</p>
			<p>“You will be back to dinner?” said Lady Staveley.</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, certainly.”</p>
			<p>“And tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason,” said the judge, “that if he will return with you we shall be delighted to see him.”</p>
			<p>The errand which took Peregrine Orme off to Hamworth will be explained in the next chapter, but his going led to a discussion among the gentlemen after dinner as to the position in which Lady Mason was now placed. There was no longer any possibility of keeping the matter secret, seeing that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dockwrath had taken great care that everyone in Hamworth should hear of it. He had openly declared that evidence would now be adduced to prove that Sir Joseph Mason’s widow had herself forged the will, and had said to many people that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason of Groby had determined to indict her for forgery. This had gone so far that Lucius had declared as openly that he would prosecute the attorney for a libel, and Dockwrath had sent him word that he was quite welcome to do so if he pleased.</p>
			<p>“It is a scandalous state of things,” said Sir Peregrine, speaking with much enthusiasm, and no little temper, on the subject. “Here is a question which was settled twenty years ago to the satisfaction of everyone who knew anything of the case, and now it is brought up again that two men may wreak their vengeance on a poor widow. They are not men; they are brutes.”</p>
			<p>“But why does she not bring an action against this attorney?” said young Staveley.</p>
			<p>“Such actions do not easily lie,” said his father. “It may be quite true that Dockwrath may have said all manner of evil things against this lady, and yet it may be very difficult to obtain evidence of a libel. It seems to me from what I have heard that the man himself wishes such an action to be brought.”</p>
			<p>“And think of the state of poor Lady Mason!” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival. “Conceive the misery which it would occasion her if she were dragged forward to give evidence on such a matter!”</p>
			<p>“I believe it would kill her,” said Sir Peregrine.</p>
			<p>“The best means of assisting her would be to give her some countenance,” said the judge; “and from all that I can hear of her, she deserves it.”</p>
			<p>“She does deserve it,” said Sir Peregrine, “and she shall have it. The people at Hamworth shall see at any rate that my daughter regards her as a fit associate. I am happy to say that she is coming to The Cleeve on my return home, and that she will remain there till after Christmas.”</p>
			<p>“It is a very singular case,” said Felix Graham, who had been thinking over the position of the lady hitherto in silence.</p>
			<p>“Indeed it is,” said the judge; “and it shows how careful men should be in all matters relating to their wills. The will and the codicil, as it appears, are both in the handwriting of the widow, who acted as an amanuensis not only for her husband but for the attorney. That fact does not in my mind produce suspicion; but I do not doubt that it has produced all this suspicion in the mind of the claimant. The attorney who advised Sir Joseph should have known better.”</p>
			<p>“It is one of those cases,” continued Graham, “in which the sufferer should be protected by the very fact of her own innocence. No lawyer should consent to take up the cudgels against her.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid that she will not escape persecution from any such professional chivalry,” said the judge.</p>
			<p>“All that is moonshine,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival.</p>
			<p>“And moonshine is a very pretty thing if you were not too much afraid of the night air to go and look at it. If the matter be as you all say, I do think that any gentleman would disgrace himself by lending a hand against her.”</p>
			<p>“Upon my word, sir, I fully agree with you,” said Sir Peregrine, bowing to Felix Graham over his glass.</p>
			<p>“I will take permission to think, Sir Peregrine,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival, “that you would not agree with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Graham if you had given to the matter much deep consideration.”</p>
			<p>“I have not had the advantage of a professional education,” said Sir Peregrine, again bowing, and on this occasion addressing himself to the lawyer; “but I cannot see how any amount of learning should alter my views on such a subject.”</p>
			<p>“Truth and honour cannot be altered by any professional arrangements,” said Graham; and then the conversation turned away from Lady Mason, and directed itself to those great corrections of legal reform which had been debated during the past autumn.</p>
			<p>The Orley Farm Case, though in other forms and different language, was being discussed also in the drawing-room. “I have not seen much of her,” said Sophia Furnival, who by some art had usurped the most prominent part in the conversation, “but what I did see I liked much. She was at The Cleeve when I was staying there, if you remember, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme said that she did remember.</p>
			<p>“And we went over to Orley Farm. Poor lady! I think everybody ought to notice her under such circumstances. Papa, I know, would move heaven and earth for her if he could.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot move the heaven or the earth either,” said Lady Staveley; “but if I thought that my calling on her would be any satisfaction to her⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It would, Lady Staveley,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme. “It would be a great satisfaction to her. I cannot tell you how warmly I regard her, nor how perfectly Sir Peregrine esteems her.”</p>
			<p>“We will drive over there next week, Madeline.”</p>
			<p>“Do, mamma. Everybody says that she is very nice.”</p>
			<p>“It will be so kind of you, Lady Staveley,” said Sophia Furnival.</p>
			<p>“Next week she will be staying with us,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme. “And that would save you three miles, you know, and we should be so glad to see you.”</p>
			<p>Lady Staveley declared that she would do both. She would call at The Cleeve, and again at Orley Farm after Lady Mason’s return home. She well understood, though she could not herself then say so, that the greater part of the advantage to be received from her kindness would be derived from its being known at Hamworth that the Staveley carriage had been driven up to Lady Mason’s door.</p>
			<p>“Her son is very clever, is he not?” said Madeline, addressing herself to Miss Furnival.</p>
			<p>Sophia shrugged her shoulders and put her head on one side with a pretty grace. “Yes, I believe so. People say so. But who is to tell whether a young man be clever or no?”</p>
			<p>“But some are so much more clever than others. Don’t you think so?”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, as some girls are so much prettier than others. But if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason were to talk Greek to you, you would not think him clever.”</p>
			<p>“I should not understand him, you know.”</p>
			<p>“Of course not; but you would understand that he was a blockhead to show off his learning in that way. You don’t want him to be clever, you see; you only want him to be agreeable.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know that I want either the one or the other.”</p>
			<p>“Do you not? I know I do. I think that young men in society are bound to be agreeable, and that they should not be there if they do not know how to talk pleasantly, and to give something in return for all the trouble we take for them.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t take any trouble for them,” said Madeline laughing.</p>
			<p>“Surely you must, if you only think of it. All ladies do, and so they ought. But if in return for that a man merely talks Greek to me, I, for my part, do not think that the bargain is fairly carried out.”</p>
			<p>“I declare you will make me quite afraid of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, he never talks Greek;⁠—at least he never has to me. I rather like him. But what I mean is this, that I do not think a man a bit more likely to be agreeable because he has the reputation of being very clever. For my part I rather think that I like stupid young men.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, do you? Then now I shall know what you think of Augustus. We think he is very clever; but I do not know any man who makes himself more popular with young ladies.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, then he is a gay deceiver.”</p>
			<p>“He is gay enough, but I am sure he is no deceiver. A man may make himself nice to young ladies without deceiving any of them; may he not?”</p>
			<p>“You must not take me ‘au pied de la lettre,’ Miss Staveley, or I shall be lost. Of course he may. But when young gentlemen are so very nice, young ladies are so apt to⁠—”</p>
			<p>“To what?”</p>
			<p>“Not to fall in love with them exactly, but to be ready to be fallen in love with, and then if a man does do it he is a deceiver. I declare it seems to me that we don’t allow them a chance of going right.”</p>
			<p>“I think that Augustus manages to steer through such difficulties very cleverly.”</p>
			<p>“He sails about in the open sea, touching at all the most lovely capes and promontories, and is never driven on shore by stress of weather! What a happy sailor he must be!”</p>
			<p>“I think he is happy, and that he makes others so.”</p>
			<p>“He ought to be made an admiral at once But we shall hear some day of his coming to a terrible shipwreck.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I hope not!”</p>
			<p>“He will return home in desperate plight, with only two planks left together, with all his glory and beauty broken and crumpled to pieces against some rock that he has despised in his pride.”</p>
			<p>“Why do you prophesy such terrible things for him?”</p>
			<p>“I mean that he will get married.”</p>
			<p>“Get married! of course he will. That’s just what we all want. You don’t call that a shipwreck; do you?”</p>
			<p>“It’s the sort of shipwreck that these very gallant barks have to encounter.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t mean that he’ll marry a disagreeable wife!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no; not in the least. I only mean to say that like other sons of Adam, he will have to strike his colours. I dare say, if the truth were known, he has done so already.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure he has not.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t at all ask to know his secrets, and I should look upon you as a very bad sister if you told them.”</p>
			<p>“But I am sure he has not got any⁠—of that kind.”</p>
			<p>“Would he tell you if he had?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I hope so; any serious secret. I am sure he ought, for I am always thinking about him.”</p>
			<p>“And would you tell him your secrets?”</p>
			<p>“I have none.”</p>
			<p>“But when you have, will you do so?”</p>
			<p>“Will I? Well, yes; I think so. But a girl has no such secret,” she continued to say, after pausing for a moment. “None, generally, at least, which she tells, even to herself, till the time comes in which she tells it to all whom she really loves.” And then there was another pause for a moment.</p>
			<p>“I am not quite so sure of that,” said Miss Furnival. After which the gentlemen came into the drawing-room.</p>
			<p>Augustus Staveley had gone to work in a manner which he conceived to be quite systematic, having before him the praiseworthy object of making a match between Felix Graham and Sophia Furnival. “By George, Graham,” he had said, “the finest girl in London is coming down to Noningsby; upon my word I think she is.”</p>
			<p>“And brought there expressly for your delectation, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no, not at all; indeed, she is not exactly in my style; she is too⁠—too⁠—too⁠—in point of fact, too much of a girl for me. She has lots of money, and is very clever, and all that kind of thing.”</p>
			<p>“I never knew you so humble before.”</p>
			<p>“I am not joking at all. She is a daughter of old Furnival’s, whom by the by I hate as I do poison. Why my governor has him down at Noningsby I can’t guess. But I tell you what, old fellow, he can give his daughter five-and-twenty thousand pounds. Think of that, Master Brook.” But Felix Graham was a man who could not bring himself to think much of such things on the spur of the moment, and when he was introduced to Sophia, he did not seem to be taken with her in any wonderful way.</p>
			<p>Augustus had asked his mother to help him, but she had laughed at him. “It would be a splendid arrangement,” he had said with energy. “Nonsense, Gus,” she had answered. “You should always let those things take their chance. All I will ask of you is that you don’t fall in love with her yourself; I don’t think her family would be nice enough for you.”</p>
			<p>But Felix Graham certainly was ungrateful for the friendship spent upon him, and so his friend felt it. Augustus had contrived to whisper into the lady’s ear that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Graham was the cleverest young man now rising at the bar, and as far as she was concerned, some amount of intimacy might at any rate have been produced; but he, Graham himself, would not put himself forward. “I will pique him into it,” said Augustus to himself, and therefore when on this occasion they came into the drawing-room, Staveley immediately took a vacant seat beside Miss Furnival, with the very friendly object which he had proposed to himself.</p>
			<p>There was great danger in this, for Miss Furnival was certainly handsome, and Augustus Staveley was very susceptible. But what will not a man go through for his friend? “I hope we are to have the honour of your company as far as Monkton Grange the day we meet there,” he said. The hounds were to meet at Monkton Grange, some seven miles from Noningsby, and all the sportsmen from the house were to be there.</p>
			<p>“I shall be delighted,” said Sophia, “that is to say if a seat in the carriage can be spared for me.”</p>
			<p>“But we’ll mount you. I know that you are a horsewoman.” In answer to which Miss Furnival confessed that she was a horsewoman, and owned also to having brought a habit and hat with her.</p>
			<p>“That will be delightful. Madeline will ride also, and you will meet the Miss Tristrams. They are the famous horsewomen of this part of the country.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t mean that they go after the dogs, across the hedges.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed they do.”</p>
			<p>“And does Miss Staveley do that?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no⁠—Madeline is not good at a five-barred gate, and would make but a very bad hand at a double ditch. If you are inclined to remain among the tame people, she will be true to your side.”</p>
			<p>“I shall certainly be one of the tame people, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley.”</p>
			<p>“I rather think I shall be with you myself; I have only one horse that will jump well, and Graham will ride him. By the by, Miss Furnival, what do you think of my friend Graham?”</p>
			<p>“Think of him! Am I bound to have thought anything about him by this time?”</p>
			<p>“Of course you are;⁠—or at any rate of course you have. I have no doubt that you have composed in your own mind an essay on the character of everybody here. People who think at all always do.”</p>
			<p>“Do they? My essay upon him then is a very short one.”</p>
			<p>“But perhaps not the less correct on that account. You must allow me to read it.”</p>
			<p>“Like all my other essays of that kind, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley, it has been composed solely for my own use, and will be kept quite private.”</p>
			<p>“I am so sorry for that, for I intended to propose a bargain to you. If you would have shown me some of your essays, I would have been equally liberal with some of mine.” And in this way, before the evening was over, Augustus Staveley and Miss Furnival became very good friends.</p>
			<p>“Upon my word she is a very clever girl,” he said afterwards, as young Orme and Graham were sitting with him in an outside room which had been fitted up for smoking.</p>
			<p>“And uncommonly handsome,” said Peregrine.</p>
			<p>“And they say she’ll have lots of money,” said Graham. “After all, Staveley, perhaps you could not do better.”</p>
			<p>“She’s not my style at all,” said he. “But of course a man is obliged to be civil to girls in his own house.” And then they all went to bed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
