<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXVI: Showing How Miss Furnival Treated Her Lovers</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-66" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Showing How Miss Furnival Treated Her Lovers</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It is a great thing for young ladies to live in a household in which free correspondence by letter is permitted. “Two for mamma, four for Amelia, three for Fanny, and one for papa.” When the postman has left his budget they should be dealt out in that way, and no more should be said about it⁠—except what each may choose to say. Papa’s letter is about money of course, and interests nobody. Mamma’s contain the character of a cook and an invitation to dinner, and as they interest everybody, are public property. But Fanny’s letters and Amelia’s should be private; and a well-bred mamma of the present day scorns even to look at the handwriting of the addresses. Now in Harley Street things were so managed that nobody did see the handwriting of the addresses of Sophia’s letters till they came into her own hand⁠—that is, neither her father nor her mother did so. That both Spooner and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ball examined them closely is probable enough.</p>
			<p>This was well for her now, for she did not wish it to be known as yet that she had accepted an offer from Lucius Mason, and she did wish to have the privilege of receiving his letters. She fancied that she loved him. She told herself over and over again that she did so. She compared him within her own mind to Augustus Staveley, and always gave the preference to Lucius. She liked Augustus also, and could have accepted him as well, had it been the way of the world in England for ladies to have two accepted lovers. Such is not the way of the world in England, and she therefore had been under the necessity of choosing one. She had taken the better of the two, she declared to herself very often; but nevertheless was it absolutely necessary that the other should be abandoned altogether? Would it not be well at any rate to wait till this trial should be over? But then the young men themselves were in such a hurry!</p>
			<p>Lucius, like an honest man, had proposed to go at once to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furnival when he was accepted; but to this Sophia had objected, “The peculiar position in which my father stands to your mother at the present moment,” said she, “would make it very difficult for him to give you an answer now.” Lucius did not quite understand the reasoning, but he yielded. It did not occur to him for a moment that either <abbr>Mr.</abbr> or Miss Furnival could doubt the validity of his title to the Orley Farm property.</p>
			<p>But there was no reason why he should not write to her. “Shall I address here?” he had asked. “Oh yes,” said Sophia; “my letters are quite private.” And he had written very frequently, and she had answered him. His last letter before the trial I propose to publish, together with Sophia’s answer, giving it as my opinion that the gentleman’s production affords by no means a good type of a lover’s letter. But then his circumstances were peculiar. Miss Furnival’s answer was, I think, much better.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Orley Farm, ⸻⁠——.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My own Sophia,</p>
				</header>
				<p>My only comfort⁠—I may really say my only comfort now⁠—is in writing to you. It is odd that at my age, and having begun the world early as I did, I should now find myself so much alone. Were it not for you, I should have no friend. I cannot describe to you the sadness of this house, nor the wretched state in which my mother exists. I sometimes think that had she been really guilty of those monstrous crimes which people lay to her charge, she could hardly have been more miserable. I do not understand it; nor can I understand why your father has surrounded her with lawyers whom he would not himself trust in a case of any moment. To me she never speaks on the subject, which makes the matter worse⁠—worse for both of us. I see her at breakfast and at dinner, and sometimes sit with her for an hour in the evening; but even then we have no conversation. The end of it is I trust soon coming, and then I hope that the sun will again be bright. In these days it seems as though there were a cloud over the whole earth.</p>
				<p>I wish with all my heart that you could have been here with her. I think that your tone and strength of mind would have enabled her to bear up against these troubles with more fortitude. After all, it is but the shadow of a misfortune which has come across her, if she would but allow herself so to think. As it is, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme is with her daily, and nothing I am sure can be more kind. But I can confess to you, though I could do so to no one else, that I do not willingly see an intimacy kept up between my mother and The Cleeve. Why was there that strange proposition as to her marriage; and why, when it was once made, was it abandoned? I know that my mother has been not only guiltless, but guileless, in these matters as to which she is accused; but nevertheless her affairs will have been so managed that it will be almost impossible for her to remain in this neighbourhood.</p>
				<p>When all this is over, I think I shall sell this place. What is there to bind me⁠—to bind me or you to Orley Farm? Sometimes I have thought that I could be happy here, devoting myself to agriculture⁠—</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">“Fiddlesticks!” Sophia exclaimed, as she read this,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p class="continued">—and doing something to lessen the dense ignorance of those around me; but for such work as that a man should be able to extend himself over a larger surface than that which I can influence. My dream of happiness now carries me away from this to other countries⁠—to the sunny south. Could you be happy there? A friend of mine whom I well knew in Germany, has a villa on the Lake of Como⁠—</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">“Indeed, sir, I’ll do no such thing,” said Sophia to herself,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p class="continued">—and there I think we might forget all this annoyance.</p>
				<p>I shall not write again now till the trial is over. I have made up my mind that I will be in court during the whole proceedings. If my mother will admit it, I will remain there close to her, as her son should do in such an emergency. If she will not have this, still I will be there. No one shall say that I am afraid to see my mother in any position to which fortune can bring her, or that I have ever doubted her innocence.</p>
				<p>God bless you, my own one.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Yours,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">
						<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">L. M.</abbr>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Taking this letter as a whole perhaps we may say that there was not as much nonsense in it as young gentlemen generally put into their love-letters to young ladies; but I am inclined to think that it would have been a better love-letter had there been more nonsense. At any rate there should have been less about himself, and more about the lady. He should have omitted the agriculture altogether, and been more sure of his loved one’s tastes before he suggested the sunny south and the Como villa. It is true that he was circumstanced as few lovers are, with reference to his mother; but still I think he might have been less lachrymose. Sophia’s answer, which was sent after the lapse of a day or two, was as follows:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Harley Street, ⸻⁠——.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dear Lucius,</p>
				</header>
				<p>I am not surprised that you should feel somewhat low-spirited at the present moment; but you will find, I have no doubt, that the results of the next week will cure all that. Your mother will be herself again when this trial is over, and you will then wonder that it should ever have had so depressing an influence either upon you or upon her. I cannot but suppose that papa has done the best as to her advisers. I know how anxious he is about it, and they say that he is very clever in such matters. Pray give your mother my love. I cannot but think she is lucky to have <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Orme with her. What can be more respectable than a connection at such a time with such people?</p>
				<p>As to your future residence, do not make up your mind to anything while your spirits are thus depressed. If you like to leave Orley Farm, why not let it instead of selling it? As for me, if it should be fated that our lots are to go together, I am inclined to think that I should prefer to live in England. In London papa’s position might probably be of some service, and I should like no life that was not active. But it is too early in the day to talk thus at present. You must not think me cold hearted if I say that what has as yet been between us must not be regarded as an absolute and positive engagement. I, on my part, hope that it may become so. My heart is not cold, and I am not ashamed to own that I esteem you favourably; but marriage is a very serious thing, and there is so much to be considered! I regard myself as a free agent, and in a great measure independent of my parents on such a matter as that; but still I think it well to make no positive promise without consulting them. When this trial is over I will speak to my father, and then you will come up to London and see us.</p>
				<p>Mind you give my love to your mother; and⁠—if it have any value in your eyes⁠—accept it yourself.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your affectionate friend,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Sophia Furnival.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I feel very confident that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival was right in declining to inquire very closely into the circumstances of her daughter’s correspondence. A young lady who could write such a letter to her lover as that requires but little looking after; and in those points as to which she may require it, will⁠—if she be so minded⁠—elude it. Such as Miss Furnival was, no care on her mother’s part would, I think, have made her better. Much care might have made her worse, as, had she been driven to such resources, she would have received her letters under a false name at the baker’s shop round the corner.</p>
			<p>But the last letter was not written throughout without interruption. She was just declaring how on her part she hoped that her present uncertain tenure of her lover’s hand might at some future time become certain, when Augustus Staveley was announced. Sophia, who was alone in the drawing-room, rose from her table, gracefully, slipped her note under the cover of the desk, and courteously greeted her visitor. “And how are they all at dear Noningsby?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Dear Noningsby is nearly deserted. There is no one there but my mother and Madeline.”</p>
			<p>“And who more would be wanting to make it still dear⁠—unless it be the judge? I declare, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley, I was quite in love with your father when I left. Talk of honey falling from people’s mouths!⁠—he drops nothing less than champagne and pineapples.”</p>
			<p>“How very difficult of digestion his conversation must be!”</p>
			<p>“By no means. If the wine be good and the fruit ripe, nothing can be more wholesome. And is everybody else gone? Let me see;⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Graham was still there when I left.”</p>
			<p>“He came away shortly afterwards⁠—as soon, that is, as his arm would allow him.”</p>
			<p>“What a happy accident that was for him, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley!”</p>
			<p>“Happy!⁠—breaking three of his ribs, his arm, and his collarbone! I thought it very unhappy.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that’s because your character is so deficient in true chivalry. I call it a very happy accident which gives a gentleman an opportunity of spending six weeks under the same roof with the lady of his love. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Graham is a man of spirit, and I am by no means sure that he did not break his bones on purpose.”</p>
			<p>Augustus for a moment thought of denying the imputation with regard to his sister, but before he had spoken he had changed his mind. He was already aware that his friend had been again invited down to Noningsby, and if his father chose to encourage Graham, why should he make difficulties? He had conceived some general idea that Felix Graham was not a guest to be welcomed into a rich man’s family as a son-in-law. He was poor and crotchety, and as regards professional matters unsteady. But all that was a matter for his father to consider, not for him. So he held his peace as touching Graham, and contrived to change the subject, veering round towards that point of the compass which had brought him into Harley Street.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps then, Miss Furnival, it might answer some purpose if I were to get myself run over outside there. I could get one of Pickford’s vans, or a dray from Barclay and Perkins’, if that might be thought serviceable.”</p>
			<p>“It would be of no use in the world, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley. Those very charitable middle-aged ladies opposite, the Miss Mac Codies, would have you into their house in no time, and when you woke from your first swoon, you would find yourself in their best bedroom, with one on each side of you.”</p>
			<p>“And you in the meantime⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I should send over every morning at ten o’clock to inquire after you⁠—in mamma’s name. ‘<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Furnival’s compliments, and hopes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley will recover the use of his legs.’ And the man would bring back word: ‘The doctor hopes he may, miss; but his left eye is gone forever.’ It is not everybody that can tumble discreetly. Now you, I fancy, would only disfigure yourself.”</p>
			<p>“Then I must try what fortune can do for me without the brewer’s dray.”</p>
			<p>“Fortune has done quite enough for you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley; I do not advise you to tempt her any further.”</p>
			<p>“Miss Furnival, I have come to Harley Street today on purpose to tempt her to the utmost. There is my hand⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley, pray keep your hand for a while longer in your own possession.”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly I shall do so, unless I dispose of it this morning. When we were at Noningsby together, I ventured to tell you what I felt for you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Did you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley? If your feelings were anything beyond the common, I don’t remember the telling.”</p>
			<p>“And then,” he continued, without choosing to notice her words, “you affected to believe that I was not in earnest in what I said to you.”</p>
			<p>“And you must excuse me if I affect to believe the same thing of you still.”</p>
			<p>Augustus Staveley had come into Harley Street with a positive resolve to throw his heart and hand and fortune at the feet of Miss Furnival. I fear that I shall not raise him in the estimation of my readers by saying so. But then my readers will judge him unfairly. They will forget that they have had a much better opportunity of looking into the character of Miss Furnival than he had had; and they will also forget that they have had no such opportunity of being influenced by her personal charms. I think I remarked before that Miss Furnival well understood how best to fight her own battle. Had she shown herself from the first anxious to regard as a definite offer the first words tending that way which Augustus had spoken to her, he would at once have become indifferent about the matter. As a consequence of her judicious conduct he was not indifferent. We always want that which we can’t get easily. Sophia had made herself difficult to be gotten, and therefore Augustus fancied that he wanted her. Since he had been in town he had been frequently in Harley Street, and had been arguing with himself on the matter. What match could be more discreet or better? Not only was she very handsome, but she was clever also. And not only was she handsome and clever, but moreover she was an heiress. What more could his friends want for him, and what more could he want for himself? His mother did in truth regard her as a nasty, sly girl; but then his mother did not know Sophia, and in such matters mothers are so ignorant!</p>
			<p>Miss Furnival, on his thus repeating his offer, again chose to affect a belief that he was not in earnest. I am inclined to think that she rather liked this kind of thing. There is an excitement in the game; and it is one which may be played without great danger to either party if it be played cautiously and with some skill. As regards Augustus at the present moment, I have to say⁠—with some regret⁠—that he abandoned all idea of caution, and that he showed very little skill.</p>
			<p>“Then,” said he, “I must beg you to lay aside an affectation which is so very injurious both to my honour and to my hopes of happiness.”</p>
			<p>“Your honour, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley, is quite safe, I am certain.”</p>
			<p>“I wish that my happiness were equally so,” said he. “But at any rate you will let me have an answer. Sophia⁠—”</p>
			<p>And now he stood up, looking at her with something really like love in his eyes, and Miss Furnival began to understand that if she so chose it the prize was really within her reach. But then was it a prize? Was not the other thing the better prize? The other thing was the better prize;⁠—if only that affair about the Orley Farm were settled. Augustus Staveley was a good-looking handsome fellow, but then there was that in the manner and gait of Lucius Mason which better suited her taste. There are ladies who prefer Worcester ware to real china; and, moreover, the order for the Worcester ware had already been given.</p>
			<p>“Sophia, let a man be ever so lighthearted, there will come to him moments of absolute and almost terrible earnestness.”</p>
			<p>“Even to you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley.”</p>
			<p>“I have at any rate done nothing to deserve your scorn.”</p>
			<p>“Fie, now; you to talk of my scorn! You come here with soft words which run easily from your tongue, feeling sure that I shall be proud in heart when I hear them whispered into my ears; and now you pretend to be angry because I do not show you that I am elated. Do you think it probable that I should treat with scorn anything of this sort that you might say to me seriously?”</p>
			<p>“I think you are doing so.”</p>
			<p>“Have you generally found yourself treated with scorn when you have been out on this pursuit?”</p>
			<p>“By heavens! you have no right to speak to me so. In what way shall I put my words to make them sound seriously to you? Do you want me to kneel at your feet, as our grandfathers used to do?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, certainly not. Our grandmothers were very stupid in desiring that.”</p>
			<p>“If I put my hand on my heart will you believe me better?”</p>
			<p>“Not in the least.”</p>
			<p>“Then through what formula shall I go?”</p>
			<p>“Go through no formula, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley. In such affairs as these very little, as I take it, depends on the words that are uttered. When heart has spoken to heart, or even head to head, very little other speaking is absolutely necessary.”</p>
			<p>“And my heart has not spoken to yours?”</p>
			<p>“Well;⁠—no;⁠—not with that downright plain open language which a heart in earnest always knows how to use. I suppose you think you like me?”</p>
			<p>“Sophia, I love you well enough to make you my wife tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; and to be tired of your bargain on the next day. Has it ever occurred to you that giving and taking in marriage is a very serious thing?”</p>
			<p>“A very serious thing; but I do not think that on that account it should be avoided.”</p>
			<p>“No; but it seems to me that you are always inclined to play at marriage. Do not be angry with me, but for the life of me I can never think you are in earnest.”</p>
			<p>“But I shall be angry⁠—very angry⁠—if I do not get from you some answer to what I have ventured to say.”</p>
			<p>“What, now; today;⁠—this morning? If you insist upon that, the answer can only be of one sort. If I am driven to decide this morning on the question that you have asked me, great as the honour is⁠—and coming from you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Staveley, it is very great⁠—I must decline it. I am not able, at any rate at the present moment, to trust my happiness altogether in your hands.” When we think of the half-written letter which at this moment Miss Furnival had within her desk, this was not wonderful.</p>
			<p>And then, without having said anything more that was of note, Augustus Staveley went his way. As he walked up Harley Street, he hardly knew whether or no he was to consider himself as bound to Miss Furnival; nor did he feel quite sure whether or no he wished to be so bound. She was handsome, and clever, and an heiress; but yet he was not certain that she possessed all those womanly charms which are desirable in a wife. He could not but reflect that she had never yet said a soft word to him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
