<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLIII: John Kenneby’s Courtship</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">John Kenneby’s Courtship</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“She’s as sweet a temper, John, as ever stirred a lump of sugar in her tea,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder to her brother, as they sat together over the fire in Great <abbr>St.</abbr> Helen’s on that same evening⁠—after his return from Hamworth. “That she is⁠—and so Smiley always found her. ‘She’s always the same,’ Smiley said to me many a day. And what can a man want more than that?”</p>
			<p>“That’s quite true,” said John.</p>
			<p>“And then as to her habits⁠—I never knew her take a drop too much since first I set eyes on her, and that’s nigh twenty years ago. She likes things comfortable;⁠—and why shouldn’t she, with two hundred a year of her own coming out of the Kingsland Road brick-fields? As for dress, her things is beautiful, and she is the woman that takes care of ’em! Why, I remember an Irish tabinet as Smiley gave her when first that venture in the brick-fields came up money; if that tabinet is as much as turned yet, why, I’ll eat it. And then, the best of it is, she’ll have you tomorrow. Indeed she will; or tonight, if you’ll ask her. Goodness gracious! if there ain’t Moulder!” And the excellent wife jumped up from her seat, poked the fire, emptied the most comfortable armchair, and hurried out to the landing at the top of the stairs. Presently the noise of a loudly wheezing pair of lungs was heard, and the commercial traveller, enveloped from head to foot in coats and comforters, made his appearance. He had just returned from a journey, and having deposited his parcels and packages at the house of business of Hubbles and Grease in Houndsditch, had now returned to the bosom of his family. It was a way he had, not to let his wife know exactly the period of his return. Whether he thought that by so doing he might keep her always on the alert and ready for marital inspection, or whether he disliked to tie himself down by the obligation of a fixed time for his return, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder had never made herself quite sure. But on neither view of the subject did she admire this practice of her lord. She had on many occasions pointed out to him how much more snug she could make him if he would only let her know when he was coming. But he had never taken the hint, and in these latter days she had ceased to give it.</p>
			<p>“Why, I’m uncommon cold,” he said in answer to his wife’s inquiries after his welfare. “And so would you be too, if you’d come up from Leeds since you’d had your dinner. What, John, are you there? The two of you are making yourself snug enough, I suppose, with something hot?”</p>
			<p>“Not a drop he’s had yet since he’s been in the house,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder. “And he’s hardly as much as darkened the door since you left it.” And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder added, with some little hesitation in her voice, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley is coming in tonight, Moulder.”</p>
			<p>“The d⁠⸺ she is! There’s always something of that kind when I gets home tired out, and wants to be comfortable. I mean to have my supper to myself, as I likes it, if all the Mother Smileys in London choose to come the way. What on earth is she coming here for this time of night?”</p>
			<p>“Why, Moulder, you know.”</p>
			<p>“No; I don’t know. I only know this, that when a man’s used up with business he don’t want to have any of that nonsense under his nose.”</p>
			<p>“If you mean me⁠—” began John Kenneby.</p>
			<p>“I don’t mean you; of course not; and I don’t mean anybody. Here, take my coats, will you? and let me have a pair of slippers. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley thinks that I’m going to change my pants, or put myself about for her⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Laws, Moulder, she don’t expect that.”</p>
			<p>“She won’t get it anyway. Here’s John dressed up as if he was going to a box in the the‑atre. And you⁠—why should you be going to expense, and knocking out things that costs money, because Mother Smiley’s coming? I’ll Smiley her.”</p>
			<p>“Now, Moulder⁠—” But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder knew that it was of no use speaking to him at the present moment. Her task should be this⁠—to feed and cosset him if possible into good humour before her guest should arrive. Her praises of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley had been very fairly true. But nevertheless she was a lady who had a mind and voice of her own, as any lady has a right to possess who draws in her own right two hundred a year out of a brick-field in the Kingsland Road. Such a one knows that she is above being snubbed, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley knew this of herself as well as any lady; and if Moulder, in his wrath, should call her Mother Smiley, or give her to understand that he regarded her as an old woman, that lady would probably walk herself off in a great dudgeon⁠—herself and her share in the brick-field. To tell the truth, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley required that considerable deference should be paid to her.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder knew well what was her husband’s present ailment. He had dined as early as one, and on his journey up from Leeds to London had refreshed himself with drink only. That last glass of brandy which he had taken at the Peterborough station had made him cross. If she could get him to swallow some hot food before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley came, all might yet be well.</p>
			<p>“And what’s it to be, <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">M.</abbr>?” she said in her most insinuating voice⁠—“there’s a lovely chop downstairs, and there’s nothing so quick as that.”</p>
			<p>“Chop!” he said, and it was all he did say at the moment.</p>
			<p>“There’s a ’am in beautiful cut,” she went on, showing by the urgency of her voice how anxious she was on the subject.</p>
			<p>For the moment he did not answer her at all, but sat facing the fire, and running his fat fingers through his uncombed hair. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley!” he said; “I remember when she was kitchen-maid at old Pott’s.”</p>
			<p>“She ain’t nobody’s kitchen-maid now,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder, almost prepared to be angry in the defence of her friend.</p>
			<p>“And I never could make out when it was that Smiley married her⁠—that is, if he ever did.”</p>
			<p>“Now, Moulder, that’s shocking of you. Of course he married her. She and I is nearly an age as possible, though I think she is a year over me. She says not, and it ain’t nothing to me. But I remember the wedding as if it was yesterday. You and I had never set eyes on each other then, <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">M.</abbr>” This last she added in a plaintive tone, hoping to soften him.</p>
			<p>“Are you going to keep me here all night without anything?” he then said. “Let me have some whisky⁠—hot, with;⁠—and don’t stand there looking at nothing.”</p>
			<p>“But you’ll take some solids with it, Moulder? Why it stands to reason you’ll be famished.”</p>
			<p>“Do as you’re bid, will you, and give me the whisky. Are you going to tell me when I’m to eat and when I’m to drink, like a child?” This he said in that tone of voice which made <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder know that he meant to be obeyed; and though she was sure that he would make himself drunk, she was compelled to minister to his desires. She got the whisky and hot water, the lemon and sugar, and set the things beside him; and then she retired to the sofa. John Kenneby the while sat perfectly silent looking on. Perhaps he was considering whether he would be able to emulate the domestic management of Dockwrath or of Moulder when he should have taken to himself <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley and the Kingsland brick-field.</p>
			<p>“If you’ve a mind to help yourself, John, I suppose you’ll do it,” said Moulder.</p>
			<p>“None for me just at present, thank’ee,” said Kenneby.</p>
			<p>“I suppose you wouldn’t swallow nothing less than wine in them togs?” said the other, raising his glass to his lips. “Well, here’s better luck, and I’m blessed if it’s not wanting. I’m pretty well tired of this go, and so I mean to let ’em know pretty plainly.”</p>
			<p>All this was understood by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder, who knew that it only signified that her husband was half tipsy, and that in all probability he would be whole tipsy before long. There was no help for it. Were she to remonstrate with him in his present mood, he would very probably fling the bottle at her head. Indeed, remonstrances were never of avail with him. So she sat herself down, thinking how she would run down when she heard <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley’s step, and beg that lady to postpone her visit. Indeed it would be well to send John to convey her home again.</p>
			<p>Moulder swallowed his glass of hot toddy fast, and then mixed another. His eyes were very bloodshot, and he sat staring at the fire. His hands were thrust into his pockets between the periods of his drinking, and he no longer spoke to anyone. “I’m ⸻ if I stand it,” he growled forth, addressing himself. “I’ve stood it a ⸻ deal too long.” And then he finished the second glass. There was a sort of understanding on the part of his wife that such interjections as these referred to Hubbles and Grease, and indicated a painfully advanced state of drink. There was one hope; the double heat, that of the fire and of the whisky, might make him sleep; and if so, he would be safe for two or three hours.</p>
			<p>“I’m blessed if I do, and that’s all,” said Moulder, grasping the whisky-bottle for the third time. His wife sat behind him very anxious, but not daring to interfere. “It’s going over the table, <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">M.</abbr>,” she then said.</p>
			<p>“D⁠⸺ the table!” he answered; and then his head fell forward on his breast, and he was fast asleep with the bottle in his hand.</p>
			<p>“Put your hand to it, John,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder in a whisper. But John hesitated. The lion might rouse himself if his prey were touched.</p>
			<p>“He’ll let it go easy if you put your hand to it. He’s safe enough now. There. If we could only get him back from the fire a little, or his face’ll be burnt off of him.”</p>
			<p>“But you wouldn’t move him?”</p>
			<p>“Well, yes; we’ll try. I’ve done it before, and he’s never stirred. Come here, just behind. The casters is good, I know. Laws! ain’t he heavy?” And then they slowly dragged him back. He grunted out some half-pronounced threat as they moved him; but he did not stir, and his wife knew that she was again mistress of the room for the next two hours. It was true that he snored horribly, but then she was used to that.</p>
			<p>“You won’t let her come up, will you?” said John.</p>
			<p>“Why not? She knows what men is as well I do. Smiley wasn’t that way often, I believe; but he was awful when he was. He wouldn’t sleep it off, quite innocent, like that; but would break everything about the place, and then cry like a child after it. Now Moulder’s got none of that about him. The worst of it is, how am I ever to get him into bed when he wakes?”</p>
			<p>While the anticipation of this great trouble was still on her mind, the ring at the bell was heard, and John Kenneby went down to the outer door that he might pay to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley the attention of waiting upon her upstairs. And upstairs she came, bristling with silk⁠—the identical Irish tabinet, perhaps, which had never been turned⁠—and conscious of the business which had brought her.</p>
			<p>“What⁠—Moulder’s asleep is he?” she said as she entered the room. “I suppose that’s as good as a pair of gloves, anyway.”</p>
			<p>“He ain’t just very well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder, winking at her friend; “he’s tired after a long journey.”</p>
			<p>“Oh‑h! ah‑h!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley, looking down upon the sleeping beauty, and understanding everything at a glance. “It’s uncommon bad for him, you know, because he’s so given to flesh.”</p>
			<p>“It’s as much fatigue as anything,” said the wife.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I dare say;” and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley shook her head. “If he fatigues himself so much as that often he’ll soon be off the hooks.”</p>
			<p>Much was undoubtedly to be borne from two hundred a year in a brick-field, especially when that two hundred a year was coming so very near home; but there is an amount of impertinent familiarity which must be put down even in two hundred a year. “I’ve known worse cases than him, my dear; and that ended worse.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I dare say. But you’re mistook if you mean Smiley. It was ’sepilus as took him off, as everybody knows.”</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear, I’m sure I’m not going to say anything against that. And now, John, do help her off with her bonnet and shawl, while I get the tea-things.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley was a firm set, healthy-looking woman of⁠—about forty. She had large, dark, glassy eyes, which were bright without sparkling. Her cheeks were very red, having a fixed settled colour that never altered with circumstances. Her black wiry hair was ended in short crisp curls, which sat close to her head. It almost collected like a wig, but the hair was in truth her own. Her mouth was small, and her lips thin, and they gave to her face a look of sharpness that was not quite agreeable. Nevertheless she was not a bad-looking woman, and with such advantages as two hundred a year and the wardrobe which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder had described, was no doubt entitled to look for a second husband.</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kenneby, and how do you find yourself this cold weather? Dear, how he do snore; don’t he?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Kenneby, very thoughtfully, “he does rather.” He was thinking of Miriam Usbech as she was twenty years ago, and of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley as she appeared at present. Not that he felt inclined to grumble at the lot prepared for him, but that he would like to take a few more years to think about it.</p>
			<p>And then they sat down to tea. The lovely chops which Moulder had despised, and the ham in beautiful cut which had failed to tempt him, now met with due appreciation. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley, though she had never been known to take a drop too much, did like to have things comfortable; and on this occasion she made an excellent meal, with a large pocket-handkerchief of Moulder’s⁠—brought in for the occasion⁠—stretched across the broad expanse of the Irish tabinet. “We shan’t wake him, shall we?” said she, as she took her last bit of muffin.</p>
			<p>“Not till he wakes natural, of hisself,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder. “When he’s worked it off, he’ll rouse himself, and I shall have to get him to bed.”</p>
			<p>“He’ll be a bit patchy then, won’t he?”</p>
			<p>“Well, just for a while of course he will,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder. “But there’s worse than him. Tomorrow morning, maybe, he’ll be just as sweet as sweet. It don’t hang about him, sullen like. That’s what I hate, when it hangs about ’em.” Then the tea-things were taken away, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley in her familiarity assisting in the removal, and⁠—in spite of the example now before them⁠—some more sugar and some more spirits, and some more hot water were put upon the table. “Well, I don’t mind just the least taste in life, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder, as we’re quite between friends; and I’m sure you’ll want it tonight to keep yourself up.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder would have answered these last words with some severity had she not felt that good humour now might be of great value to her brother.</p>
			<p>“Well, John, and what is it you’ve got to say to her?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder, as she put down her empty glass. Between friends who understood each other so well, and at their time of life, what was the use of ceremony?</p>
			<p>“La, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder, what should he have got to say? Nothing I’m sure as I’d think of listening to.”</p>
			<p>“You try her, John.”</p>
			<p>“Not but what I’ve the greatest respect in life for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kenneby, and always did have. If you must have anything to do with men, I’ve always said, recommend me to them as is quiet and steady, and hasn’t got too much of the gab;⁠—a quiet man is the man for me any day.”</p>
			<p>“Well, John?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder.</p>
			<p>“Now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder, can’t you keep yourself to yourself, and we shall do very well. Laws, how he do snore! When his head goes bobbing that way I do so fear he’ll have a fit.”</p>
			<p>“No he won’t; he’s coming to, all right. Well, John?”</p>
			<p>“I’m sure I shall be very happy,” said John, “if she likes it. She says that she respects me, and I’m sure I’ve a great respect for her. I always had⁠—even when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Smiley was alive.”</p>
			<p>“It’s very good of you to say so,” said she; not speaking however as though she were quite satisfied. What was the use of his remembering Smiley just at present?</p>
			<p>“Enough’s enough between friends any day,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder. “So give her your hand, John.”</p>
			<p>“I think it’ll be right to say one thing first,” said Kenneby, with a solemn and deliberate tone.</p>
			<p>“And what’s that?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley, eagerly.</p>
			<p>“In such a matter as this,” continued Kenneby, “where the hearts are concerned⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You didn’t say anything about hearts yet,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley, with some measure of approbation in her voice.</p>
			<p>“Didn’t I?” said Kenneby. “Then it was an omission on my part, and I beg leave to apologise. But what I was going to say is this: when the hearts are concerned, everything should be honest and aboveboard.”</p>
			<p>“Oh of course,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder; “and I’m sure she don’t suspect nothing else.”</p>
			<p>“You’d better let him go on,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley.</p>
			<p>“My heart has not been free from woman’s lovely image.”</p>
			<p>“And isn’t free now, is it, John?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder.</p>
			<p>“I’ve had my object, and though she’s been another’s, still I’ve kept her image on my heart.”</p>
			<p>“But it ain’t there any longer, John? He’s speaking of twenty years ago, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley.”</p>
			<p>“It’s quite beautiful to hear him,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley. “Go on, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kenneby.”</p>
			<p>“The years are gone by as though they was nothing, and still I’ve had her image on my heart. I’ve seen her today.”</p>
			<p>“Her gentleman’s still alive, ain’t he?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley.</p>
			<p>“And likely to live,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder.</p>
			<p>“I’ve seen her today,” Kenneby continued; “and now the Adriatic’s free to wed another.”</p>
			<p>Neither of the ladies present exactly understood the force of the quotation; but as it contained an appropriate reference to marriage, and apparently to a second marriage, it was taken by both of them in good part. He was considered to have made his offer, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley thereupon formally accepted him. “He’s spoke quite handsome, I’m sure,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley to his sister; “and I don’t know that any woman has a right to expect more. As to the brick-fields⁠—.” And then there was a slight reference to business, with which it will not be necessary that the readers of this story should embarrass themselves.</p>
			<p>Soon after that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kenneby saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smiley home in a cab, and poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moulder sat by her lord till he roused himself from his sleep. Let us hope that her troubles with him were as little vexatious as possible; and console ourselves with the reflection that at twelve o’clock the next morning, after the second bottle of soda and brandy, he was “as sweet as sweet.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
